
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 73945 ***





Transcriber’s note

Variable spelling and hyphenation have been retained. Minor punctuation
inconsistencies have been silently repaired. The “Index to subjects
connected with the trade and manufactures of Belgium” appears in the
first volume. A list of the changes made can be found at the end of the
book. Formatting and special characters are indicated as follows:

  _italic_
  =bold=



                               BELGIUM.

                               VOL. II.

[Illustration: TOWN HALL, GHENT.]




                               BELGIUM.

                                  BY

                    J. EMERSON TENNENT, ESQ., M. P.

           AUTHOR OF “LETTERS FROM THE ÆGEAN,” AND “HISTORY OF
                          MODERN GREECE.”

              “L’UNION FAIT LA FORCE.”--MOTTO OF BELGIUM.

                            IN TWO VOLUMES.

                               VOL. II.

                                LONDON:
                RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,
                 =Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty.=
                                 1841.




                                LONDON:
            PRINTED BY SCHULZE AND CO., 13, POLAND STREET.




CONTENTS

OF THE

SECOND VOLUME.


  CHAPTER I.

    _The Palaces of Brussels_--Palace of the Prince of
    Orange--Embarrassment of the government respecting it--Description
    of the interior--_Chambers of the Belgian legislature_--Palais de
    la Nation--Constitution of Belgium--Variable franchise--Removal
    of the picture of Waterloo--THE PARK--Singular scenes of
    the revolution--Curious account of the adventures of an
    English party at the Hôtel de Bellevue during the riots at
    Brussels--_Works of the Société du Renard at Brussels_--The
    road to Antwerp--Villas--Old châteaux--House of Rubens and
    Teniers--The village of Vieux Dieux--Appearance of the
    country--_The tower of the cathedral_--Fortifications--Narrow
    streets--Palace of Napoleon--The houses--_History of
    Antwerp_--Festival of the ladies’ eve--Immense commerce in the
    sixteenth century--Closing of the Scheldt in 1648--Projects of
    Napoleon for Antwerp--Arsenal and locks--_Trade from 1815 to
    1830_--Affected by the revolution--Transit trade of Belgium--Absurd
    system of competition with Holland--RUBENS--Fêtes in his
    honour--Modern painters--_Verboeckhoven_--_The Museum_--Rubens’
    genius--The Crucifixion--The adoration of the Magi--Vandyke--_The
    cathedral_--View from the tower--Crucifix made from the statue of
    Alva--Monument of Quentin Metsys--Interior of the church--_Rubens’
    Descent from the Cross_--The tomb of Rubens in the Church of St.
    Jacques--_Church of St. Paul_--The Calvary and Purgatory--Aspect
    of a Roman Catholic place of worship--A lady of Antwerp at
    vespers--_St. Andrews’ Church_--Superb pulpit--Monument to Mary
    Queen of Scotland--Dinner with M. David--Want of carpets in
    continental houses--THE CITADEL--Extraordinary scene--General
    Chassé--The patriot army--The singular history of its three
    commanders--The bombardment--Places at the theatre to see the
    siege.                                                             1

  CHAPTER II.

    Quays of Antwerp--Peculiar mode of training young trees--The
    Scheldt--The flying bridge of Napoleon--Story of Van
    Speyk--Polder at the Tête de Flandres--Its catastrophe in
    1837--Zwyndrecht--_Different professions of the Belgian
    saints_--Story of the curate of St. Joachim--Beveren--_St.
    Nicholas_--Dense population--A market--Flemish
    ballad-singers--Ancient drama of Flanders--Tamise--RUINOUS
    CONDITION OF THE COTTON TRADE _in Belgium since the
    revolution_--Its causes--Inability of the government to
    afford relief--Diminution of exports since 1833--Remarkable
    petition of the trade to the legislature--Remedies suggested
    by them--Impracticability of any commercial union with
    France--Or the Zoll-Verein--_Dendermonde_--Siege by the
    Duke of Marlborough--Description of its present state--Its
    manufactures--MECHLIN--Curious old city--The Archbishop
    Sterckx--A political prelate--Mechlin lace--Flax--The Cathedral
    of St. Romoald--The tower--Carillon--Immense bells--The
    corporation of Mechlin--_The tomb of the Bertholdi_--Van Eyck’s
    paintings--_Vandyke’s Crucifixion_--Superiority of Rubens in
    composition--_Church of Notre-Dame_--“The miraculous draught
    of fishes”--Favourite paintings of Rubens in the Church of St.
    John--Hôtel de St. Jaques.                                        80

  CHAPTER III.

    Scenery around Louvain--_The Belgian railroad system_--Peculiar
    adaptation of the country--Policy of Government interference
    in their construction--The average cost per mile--Causes of
    the difference in outlay between Belgium and England--Cheap
    rates of travelling in Belgium--_Accidents_--Success not yet
    decided--Louvain--Its extent--THE UNIVERSITY OF LOUVAIN--Its
    former fame--Its present condition--The bierre de Louvain--_The
    great brewery_--Its processes--Amazing consumption of beer in
    Belgium--Its different characters--_The Hôtel de Ville_--Its
    pictures--Gallery of M. Vanderschreick--The collegiate church of
    St. Pierre--_Legend of Saint Margaret of Louvain_--Tomb of Justus
    Lipsius--Flight of the “braves Belges” at Louvain in 1832--Singular
    change in the character of the people for courage--The present
    soldiery--_Terveuren_--The park and palace of the Prince of
    Orange--_The Forest of Soigné_--WATERLOO--The Belgic Lion--Its
    injury to the field--Irish anecdote--Bravery of the Irish troops
    at Waterloo--_Hougemont_--The orchard--Relics of the fight--The
    Duke of Wellington’s estate--No monument to him on the field--The
    Duke of Marlborough--La Belle Alliance--_Quatre Bras_--The woods
    cut down--Beautiful scenery of the Meuse and the Sambre--NAMUR--My
    Uncle Toby--The citadel--Don John of Austria--The cathedral--_The
    church of St. Loup_--The trade in cutlery--THE DESCENT OF THE
    MEUSE--Its beauty and its wealth--Andennes--_History of Mr.
    Cockerill_--His influence on the manufactures of Belgium--_His
    print-works at Andennes_--Ruined by the revolution--_The
    manufacture of paper in Belgium_--Huy.                           117

  CHAPTER IV.

    Huy--The citadel--Churches--_The mineral and coal districts of
    Belgium_--Prosperity of coal mines--Quantity produced in Belgium
    compared with other countries--Its price at Ghent, Brussels,
    and Antwerp--Panic in 1836 for the exhaustion of coal in
    Belgium--Scenery of the Meuse--Remarkable individuals born in its
    vicinity--Chateaux of Aigrement and Chokier--_Seraing_--Immense
    extent of the works--Its produce within its own walls--History
    of the establishment--Palace of the Prince Bishops of
    Liege--Encouraged by the King of Holland--The building--Huge
    steam engine--Surprising extent of the operations carried
    on--Iron works--Halls for construction of machines--Vast numbers
    of workmen employed--Its exports--_Mr. John Cockerill_--Extent
    of his speculations--Development of Seraing attributable to
    them--Its future prospects--Policy of England in regard to the
    export of machinery--_Importation of machinery into Belgium_--Road
    to Liege--LIEGE--No sympathy with its history--Turbulent and
    unamiable character of its ancient populace--Prince Bishop declares
    war upon France--Share of the Liegois in the revolution of
    1830--Her threatened attack upon Seraing--The town--_Manufacture
    of fire-arms and cannon_--A flax mill--Its churches poor--The
    Palais de Justice--University--_Scenery of the Vesdre_--The
    railroad--_Chaud-fontaine_--SPA--Deserted--VERVIERS--The
    town--Conduct during the revolution--_The woollen trade of
    Belgium_--Want of native wool--Extent and decline of the trade--Its
    causes--Statement of M. Briavionne--_Joint Stock Companies_ in
    Belgium--Account of two at Verviers--The mania for speculation--Its
    failure--The Prussian frontier--Limbourg--Prospects of Belgium--Her
    bad condition--Policy of the King of Holland--That of the
    present government--Present aspect of their trade--Impossibility
    of competing with England--Character of the Belgian
    mechanics--_Ruinous effects of the_ “REPEAL OF THE UNION.”       166

  CHAPTER V.

    Change in the aspect of the country in crossing the frontier from
    Belgium into Prussia--Passports, no real inconvenience--Anecdote
    of a Jamaica planter--First view of AIX-LA-CHAPELLE--Its
    population and employments--_Insurrection of the Patriots in
    1830_--Its absurd termination--The Cathedral of Charlemagne--Its
    architecture--Donation of Mary Queen of Scots--THE TOMB OF
    CHARLEMAGNE--His singular mode of interment--The relics in the
    Treasury--The Redoute--Gaming discountenaced in Prussia--_The
    Hôtel de Ville_--Statue and fountain of Charlemagne--Environs of
    Aix agreeable--Political condition of the Trans-Rhenan province of
    Prussia--_Excellent posting arrangements_--Improvement suggested in
    England--Aspect of the country to Juliers--JULIERS--_Neuss_--Trade
    in crushing oil might be advantageously introduced in Ireland--The
    church of St. Quirinus--The Rhine.                               219




INDEX TO SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH THE TRADE AND MANUFACTURES OF BELGIUM.

Fisheries, i. 9.

Lace, manufacture of, i. 41.

Conseils de Prud’hommes, i. 51.

The Linen Trade, i. 55, 68, 129.

Cultivation of Flax, i. 56, 137.

Linen Yarn Mills, i. 63; ii, 193.

Export of Flowers, i. 72.

Manufacture of Machinery, i. 93, 99; ii. 25, 174.

Exportation of Machinery from England, i. 94; ii. 185.

Distillation, i. 131.

Flemish Agriculture, i. 133.

Bleaching, i. 150.

Crushing of Oil, i. 151; ii. 106.

Manufacture of Wooden Shoes, i. 152.

Refining of Sugar, i. 161.

Beet-root Sugar, i. 167.

Calico-printing, i. 170.

Carpet-weaving, ii. 28.

Carriage-building, ii. 29.

Books, ii. 29.

Transit Trade of Belgium, ii. 45.

Shipping, ii. 40.

Silk Trade, ii. 45.

Cotton Trade, ii. 91.

Gilt Leather chairs, ii. 109.

Railroads, ii. 119.

Brewing, ii. 131.

Cutlery, ii. 157.

Paper, Manufacture of, ii. 163.

Coal Mines, ii. 168.

Fire-arms and Cannon, ii. 191.

Woollen Trade, ii. 199.

Joint Stock Companies, ii. 204.

General State and Prospects of Belgian Manufacturers, i. 81; ii. 210.




BELGIUM.

CHAPTER I.

BRUSSELS--ANTWERP.

    _The Palaces of Brussels_--Palace of the Prince of
      Orange--Embarrassment of the government respecting
      it--Description of the interior--_Chambers of the Belgian
      legislature_--Palais de la Nation--Constitution of
      Belgium--Variable franchise--Removal of the picture of
      Waterloo--THE PARK--Singular scenes of the revolution--Curious
      account of the adventures of an English party at the Hôtel de
      Bellevue during the riots at Brussels--_Works of the Société
      du Renard at Brussels_--The road to Antwerp--Villas--Old
      châteaux--House of Rubens and Teniers--The village of
      Vieux Dieux--Appearance of the country--_The tower of the
      cathedral_--Fortifications--Narrow streets--Palace of
      Napoleon--The houses--_History of Antwerp_--Festival of the
      ladies’ eve--Immense commerce in the sixteenth century--Closing
      of the Scheldt in 1648--Projects of Napoleon for Antwerp--Arsenal
      and locks--_Trade from 1815 to 1830_--Affected by the
      revolution--Transit trade of Belgium--Absurd system of
      competition with Holland--RUBENS--Fêtes in his honour--Modern
      painters--_Verboeckhoven_--_The Museum_--Rubens’ genius--The
      Crucifixion--The adoration of the Magi--Vandyke--_The
      cathedral_--View from the tower--Crucifix made from the
      statue of Alva--Monument of Quentin Metsys--Interior of the
      church--_Rubens’ Descent from the Cross_--The tomb of Rubens in
      the Church of St. Jacques--_Church of St. Paul_--The Calvary
      and Purgatory--Aspect of a Roman Catholic place of worship--A
      lady of Antwerp at vespers--_St. Andrews’ Church_--Superb
      pulpit--Monument to Mary Queen of Scotland--Dinner with
      M. David--Want of carpets in continental houses--THE
      CITADEL--Extraordinary scene--General Chassé--The patriot
      army--The singular history of its three commanders--The
      bombardment--Places at the theatre to see the siege.


THE palaces of Brussels, which we have been visiting to-day are two;
that of the King is a heavy looking building, which was formerly two
houses separated by a street, which have now been united, and patched
up into one residence, more remarkable for solidity than beauty. It
contains, however, some splendid rooms, especially a grand ball-room
for state occasions, and a few paintings of high excellence. Close by
it, is that of the Prince of Orange, which has been a source of much
embarrassment to the Belgian government. It was erected for the Prince
out of a fund, voted for the purpose by the nation in recognition of
his military services at Waterloo; and it was furnished, I think, in
part, at least, at his own charge. But the whole was barely completed
when the Revolution of 1830 drove the Prince, whom the people so
recently delighted to honor, from his domains and his newly acquired
house.

What was now to be done with the palace! Could the people who had so
recently conferred it on him wrest it back? Had the Prince of Orange
been King, the case would have been different, but he was still no more
than a private gentleman, during the life time of his father. He was
not personally responsible for any political offences charged against
the crown, and the confiscation of his property would, therefore, have
been an act of private wrong. Still there was not wanting a party among
the _esprits forts_ of the Revolution, to urge its appropriation to
the purposes of the state. On the other hand, the Prince naturally
indignant at the expulsion of his family, hesitated to take any steps
for the removal of his property, and the entire of the gorgeous
furniture, both of this palace and another at Treveuren on the borders
of the Forest of Soignies, given to him under the same circumstances,
and at the same time, by the nation, were left behind untouched, but
by no means abandoned, as they were still under the charge of his
domestics and agents.

Perhaps, too, in addition to the national unwillingness of the Prince
by the breaking up of his establishment, to avow his consciousness
of the utter hopelessness of the family ever retrieving their lost
position; he may have felt that his deserted palace, with all its
portraits, statues, busts and paintings, its sumptuous decorations
and elegant and refined bijouterie, left as he had last used them,
apparently, in all the hurry and alarm of flight, would be a desirable
memento to leave behind him to the party who still sighed for the
restoration of his house. And that on this consideration, he was in no
haste to make any new disposition of it.

Be it as it may, however, the palace and all its contents remained
under the protection of the Belgian government, though in the actual
custody of the Prince’s servants, down to the final ratification of
the treaty for the independence of Belgium in 1839, and visitors were
admitted to its sumptuous apartments on obtaining an order from the
minister of finance. That formal abandonment, however, by Holland,
of every recognized claim upon its sequestrated dominions, left the
Prince of Orange no further pretext for the apparent desertion of his
property, and within the last few weeks, the contents of the palace
have been in process of removal to the Hague. The books, the paintings
and bijouterie are already gone, and the rest of the furniture is
speedily to follow, so that, at present, the only objects to be seen,
are the hangings of embroidered silk and velvet, the superb ormolu
candelabra in the ball room, the gilded chairs, and almost priceless
tables of lapis lazuli and malachite, one of which has been estimated,
I know not how correctly, at 500,000 francs, and another at three times
that sum. They were presents from the Emperor of Russia to his sister
the Princess of Orange, together with the slabs of Siberian granite,
with which the walls of some of the magnificent saloons are encased,
and which is of extraordinary whiteness and beauty.

The exterior of this really superb residence, for it is too small to
correspond with our ideas of the magnitude of a palace, is utterly
unworthy of its matchless contents and internal decorations, but both
taken together, are said to have cost upwards of twenty millions of
francs, and before its dismantlement, it was beyond all comparison
or question, the most recherché mansion in Europe. Perhaps the most
interesting apartments are those of the Princess, consisting of the
usual bedrooms, baths, boudoir, library, and reception rooms, all
of which remained undisturbed as their illustrious occupant had left
them, when setting out on that journey to the Hague, whence she little
imagined she was never again to return to Brussels. Her books and
drawings still lay upon the table, her writing materials and some
papers on the portfolio beside them, and all the charming little
nic-nacs of the boudoir still remained undisturbed from the disposition
in which her own hand had last arranged them. It is not possible
that the sympathy which even a foreigner feels on a visit to such a
spot, should not have been warmly shared by a large proportion of the
Belgians themselves, with these interesting souvenirs perpetually
before them. I presume the palace will still be left open for the
public; and even if divested of its more luxurious ornaments, its
marble walls, rich ceilings, and floors of costly marqueterie, will
still render it the bijou of Brussels.

The building in which the Belgian parliament holds its sittings, is
situated in the same square, on the side opposite to that occupied by
the royal palace. It is a large, Grecian edifice, with a considerable
quantity of sculpture and architectural decoration externally, but
within, its passages and chambers have almost a republican simplicity
and absence of ornament. The main edifice itself is not new, having
been erected by Maria Theresa, for the ancient Conseil de Brabant--it
now bears the commodious name of the _Palais de la Nation_. Adjoining
it, in the Rue de la Loi, the Downing Street of Brussels, are the
official residences and offices of the ministers of finances and public
works, and the home and foreign secretaries of state.

The entrance hall is a very large and low vestibule, paved with
dove-coloured marble, communicating with two staircases, which lead
to the chambers of the commons and the senate. In conformity with
the anti-aristocratic spirit of the constitution, which declares the
equality of all orders, the chamber of the upper house has nothing in
its furniture to distinguish it from the lower, except, indeed, that
the latter is by far the larger and more handsome apartment of the
two. That of the senate is a moderate sized square room, with a green
table surrounded by chairs. That of the commons is a semi-circle,
lighted from above, surrounded by columns which support the roof, and
fitted up with benches covered with green morocco, with conveniences
for paper and writing materials before each member, and in front of
these is the chair of the President, and the tribune to which each
orator advances in succession to address the house. It is in the latter
chamber that the King opens and closes, in person, the sittings of the
Assembly, at the commencement and end of each session.

Instead of the anomalous hours and seasons of the British Parliament,
those of the Belgian Assemblies are in winter, and at mid-day, and
its discussions open to the public, with a power invested in any ten
members, to demand a vote of the Chamber for the exclusion of strangers
during any particular debate. The secretaries at the table, are
members of the House, and take share in its proceedings. The number
of representatives is regulated by the amount of population, in the
proportion of one member for every 40,000 inhabitants; and that of the
senate is _one half_ the number of the other House. The latter are
chosen for eight years, and the former for four, and the elections
take place for the senate every fourth year, when one half retire,
and for the commons, every second. The qualification of a senator, is
the payment of 1,000 florins a-year of direct taxes, whilst that of a
representative is only two hundred, or about £10. The members of the
lower House receive each 200 florins a-month, during the sitting of
the house; a distinction is conferred on the members of the upper of
having neither pay nor perquisites. The ministers have seats in both
assemblies, and a right to be heard in their discussions, should they
require to speak, but no power to vote in the divisions; either chamber
may, also, require their presence and explanations if essential to its
deliberations.

The _elective_ franchise, I forgot to state, varies in amount in
the different provinces, but in all it requires the elector to be
twenty-five years of age, and by birth or naturalization, a Belgian.
A distinction is also made between the electors of the towns and the
peasants of the same province who vote for the same member. Thus,
for the province of Antwerp, the elector for the city must pay, as
his qualification, eighty florins of direct taxes, annually, whilst
the peasant is only required to pay thirty. In Brussels and Ghent,
the sum is the same as in Antwerp; in Liege, it is seventy florins;
in Bruges, sixty; in Courtrai, fifty; and in Ostend, forty, down to
thirty-five for some of the smaller city constituencies. The scale
seems to be regulated, throughout, in proportion to the agricultural or
commercial reputation of the electoral district; Luxembourg and Namur,
for instance, are the lowest in the list, and their peasantry pay but
twenty florins, or something less than twenty shillings a-year; whilst
in Limbourg, the qualification is twenty-five, and thirty in each of
the other six provinces of the kingdom.

The lower chamber was, till lately, decorated with two paintings of
the battles of Nieuport and Waterloo. In the latter, the principal
figure was that of the Prince of Orange, at the moment of his receiving
his wound in the action. This unhappy painting seems to have been a
source of some embarrassment--to keep such a conspicuous memento of the
expelled dynasty, and that, too, recording its strongest claim upon
the gratitude of the nation; and, above all, to leave it suspended in
the very midst of the revolutionary leaders, must have been peculiarly
awkward. But then, this objection did not extend to the battle of
Nieuport--one of the most decisive victories of the patriots over the
Spaniards in the war of liberation, and to take down the one without
the other would have looked peevish. The difficulty seems, however,
to have been surmounted, for we found them both gone; and that of
Waterloo, we saw in a back apartment, awaiting, perhaps, its removal
to some still more secluded depository.

The Park, which forms the centre of the square, which is flanked
by these public buildings, is the favourite promenade of the
Bruxellois--the Tuilleries’ garden of their little Paris, and, in fact,
it is _a garden_, its dimensions being too small to merit its more
dignified title. Without being either Dutch or cockney, it contains
as many varieties of ornament as could well be disposed of in so
small a space--broad green slopes, tall trees and shaded walks, with
fountains, busts and statues in abundance. Within the gardens, there
is a miniature theatre and a café, and a ball-room, called La Salle
du Wauxhall, and in summer, a military band plays during the evening
promenade. This little “pleasance” was, in 1830, the focus of the
revolutionary riot, where the Dutch troops, under the command of Prince
Frederick, made their unfortunate entry into the city, and after an
interval of carnage and incendiarism, retired, without a demonstration
of their strength, or a vigorous effort to crush the revolt. The
houses and trees still bear traces of these sanguinary “three days,”
the latter having their wounds still bound up with plates of lead and
iron nailed over the spots which were torn by the balls.

The scene which this now peaceful spot presented on the morning after
the departure of the Dutch troops, is thus described by an eye witness.
“In the park, the statues, trees, gates, and ornaments were shattered
or defaced; the walks, alleys, and hollows were strewed with fragments
of fire-arms, gun-carriages, weapons, and military equipments. Here the
mangled bodies of dead horses obstructed the path; there lay a still
palpitating, half-stripped corpse, and beside them a dozen others,
barely covered with a few hands-full of earth or leaves. Ensanguined
and discoloured streaks marked the trace where some wounded victim
had dragged himself from the scene of combat; and deep indentures in
the sand, with dark coagulated pools, covered by myriads of insects,
indicated the spots where other gallant men had made their last death
struggle.”[1]

In the very midst of this scene of commotion and carnage, the Hôtel
de Bellevue, the favourite resort of the English, was occupied, at
the moment, by a party of our fellow countrymen, and a few females of
distinction. In a pamphlet which I picked up at Brussels, published at
the period, I found the following graphic detail of the siege which
they sustained--a chapter of real romance, such as occurs in the
lives of but few of the generations of tourists who annually swarm in
Brussels. It professes to be written by an English officer, who was one
of the party.

“When the King’s troops commenced the attack on Brussels, on the
morning of the 23d., the English in the Hôtel de Bellevue consisted
of Lady Charles Bentinck, niece to the Duke of Wellington, and two
daughters, the eldest about thirteen, Mr. and Mrs. George Harley
Drummond, Mrs. and Miss Wolseley, (an interesting girl), Captains
Dent and Sibbourn, and their respective servants. The cannonading
had scarcely begun near the Schærbeck gate, when Captains Dent and
Sibbourn hurried to the boulevards, behind the palace of the Prince
of Orange, to observe, if possible, the advance of the troops, and to
see a nine-pounder belonging to the bourgeois pointed and served. In a
few minutes, however, they heard the grape-shot rattling in the trees
over their heads, which induced them to return to the hotel, when, just
as they were turning the corner of the house, a shell burst within
a few yards of them. This sufficed to show, that on the part of the
troops, the most hostile dispositions had been determined on. Shells
and grape-shot were thrown in abundance from the rising ground outside
the gate of Schærbeck, along the Rue Royale, towards the Place Royale.
From the hotel, we had a good view of the advance of the troops, who
were received by a brisk fire from the bourgeois, who occupied houses
on each side of the street, and who made great havoc amongst the
military; but the latter, by dint of superior numbers, were not long
in reaching the park, which the bourgeois had, most unfortunately
for themselves, and most unaccountably, neglected to occupy. They
rushed through the park, and took possession of the King’s palace,
which was also unoccupied. Rapid, however, as was this success, they
were never able, during the four day’s fighting, to proceed in this
direction, and all their attempts to gain the Place Royale proved
fruitless, notwithstanding the very brisk fire they incessantly kept up
against the burghers. It is a curious fact, that not more than about
two hundred of the latter were upon the Place Royale, when repeated
attacks were made upon it by the military, but they had three or four
nine-pounders remarkably well served.

With a view to take possession of these guns, a party of not more than
forty lancers, advanced along that part of the Hôtel de Bellevue facing
the park; but they had scarcely reached the corner, and got into the
fire, when they faced about, and hastily retreated as far as the King’s
palace. A sharp fire of both cannon and small arms now commenced, which
continued without interruption until the final retreat of the troops.
The situation of the English ladies in the Hôtel de Bellevue became
very critical at this moment. We had all removed to a room on the
second floor, facing the Place Royale, but some of the burghers having
entered the house, commenced firing from the roof, which naturally drew
upon the building the fire from the troops.

The rapid succession of shots from and against the hotel, and the
constant fire of artillery close to its gates, with the shouting of the
people, were enough to intimidate the stoutest female heart. We found
it absolutely necessary to take the ladies to a lower part of the house
more under cover, though in descending the great staircase, they became
exposed to a sharp fire of musketry. However, we succeeded in getting
them safe down. The place of refuge was the cook’s garde-manger, a sort
of cellar, on a line with, but a few steps lower than the kitchen.
Being vaulted and under ground, we remained there in comparative safety
until the afternoon of Saturday the 25th. The ladies gradually became
accustomed to the noise of the fire over their heads, and as two of
them were naturally of a very lively turn of mind, the cellar presented
occasionally a scene of hilarity, fun, and good humour, which strongly
contrasted with the more frequent one of alarm, fear, and despondency.
It must not be supposed that the ladies were confined prisoners during
the whole time in the cellar; curiosity prevailed, even at the risk of
life, and there was many a creep up stairs to gain a peep at the scene
without. At the same time, it would be unjust to attribute this motive
to one lady, Mrs. Drummond, whose kind heart and genuine philanthrophy
induced her to visit the wounded whom they were constantly bringing
into the hall, and to render every assistance in her power to those
brave fellows who though in agony, silently but significantly
expressed their gratitude.

    “Oh woman in our hours of ease,
    Uncertain, coy, and hard to please,
    And variable as the shade
    By the light quivering aspin made,
    When pain and anguish wring the brow
    A minist’ring angel thou.”

Mrs. Drummond had a wonderful escape. Before she quitted her apartments
at the commencement of the attack upon the town, shots passed through
them, and in a few minutes afterwards they were filled with all kinds
of projectiles: one ball in particular lodged itself on the fair
lady’s pillow. In the afternoon of the second day of the battle, a
Belgic gentleman and his family entered the cellar where they made
good their quarters, having been previously staying in another part of
the hotel nearer the King’s palace. There was something in this man’s
appearance so disagreeable, that none of us felt disposed to give him
a a very cordial reception, and the result proved that we were by
no means unworthy disciples of Lavater. About the middle of Saturday
(the third day) a Liegois chief came into the cellar evidently with
a view to reconnoitre the party, when Mrs. Drummond, by one of those
sudden impulses which seem to belong more to the secret workings of an
all-directing providence, than to spring solely from human foresight,
extended her hand to him, and begged him to embrace her, intimating at
the same time that she trusted to him for protection. The chief nobly
replied that with his life he would defend her, and shortly afterwards
left the cellar. The kiss thus bestowed upon the cheek of this man,
dirty and black as he was from the thick of the fight, was indeed a
most lucky one for us, as it was certainly the means of saving the
lives of the whole of our party both ladies and gentlemen. In three
or four hours afterwards, there was more than usual bustle and noise
in the house, in consequence of the burghers having occupied it in
still greater force, and brought one of their guns into the yard,
ready, upon the opening of a gate, to pour grape shot upon the troops
immediately opposite in the park. It was at this moment also, that the
Belgic gentleman hastily entered the cellar, and desired his family
to follow him as quick as possible. He had scarcely reached the front
gate, when the same Liegois chief above mentioned seized him as his
prisoner. In fact he was a traitor, and had been strongly suspected by
the burghers of giving provisions during the night to some officers of
the royal troops through one of the gates facing the park. Certainly,
many circumstances which it is needless to detail, tended to convince
us that these suspicions were but too well founded. Had the burghers
rushed into the cellar, there can be no doubt, considering the highly
exasperated state they were in, that we should all have fallen victims
to their rage. Another Liegois chief has since told me that having
taken compassion upon this Belgic family, he used every exertion to
restrain the fury of the burghers, and succeeded in conducting them
to the Hôtel de Ville; still they were very roughly handled, and the
mother and daughter (a beautiful girl of seventeen), were completely
covered with mud which had been thrown at them. There were now many
indications of a most desperate conflict in and about the hotel, and
as our staying any longer there, seemed to subject us to the imminent
risk of being massacred by the infuriated Dutch should they gain
possession of the building, or of being buried in its ruins, should
it be battered down, or set on fire, it became necessary to take some
decided steps. The master of the hotel appeared to be much agitated.
He had become a marked man from his having casually harboured the
traitor, and from other circumstances. I shall never forget the style
in which Lady C. Bentinck addressed him at this moment. She seemed to
be fired with the spirit and decision of her illustrious uncle, and
insisted upon the master giving his true opinion whether it was safer
to quit, or to remain in the house. He declined for some time to give
an opinion either way, but at last told her she had better go. Lady
Bentinck instantly decided upon leaving, and the whole party agreed to
follow her example. When in the act of preparing to depart, five or
six armed burghers entered the cellar and offered to escort us to a
place of greater safety. They had evidently been sent by the Liegois
chief. The party now left the cellar: arrived at the gate, some little
hesitation being shown, the Liegois chief whispered to Mrs. Drummond
“_Vite vite, Madame._” We sallied out, Lady Bentinck with her daughters
leading the way. Captain Sibbourn with Mrs. Wollesley on one side and
Miss Wollesley on the other were the next; behind them were Captain
Dent and Mrs. Drummond, followed by Mr. Drummond and his little boy,
the whole party being escorted by six burghers. The latter having
conducted us along the Place Royale as far as the church, desired us
to cross the Place with them as quickly as possible, as we had now to
pass through a very heavy fire of grape shot and musketry. It was a
most trying moment for the poor women, who could distinctly hear the
shots whizzing past them. When we had got into the most exposed part of
the Place, Mrs. Wollesley fell down, and it was quite impossible for
Captain Sibbourn to get her on, as her daughter on his other arm was on
the point of fainting at the sight of her mother on the ground. But two
or three of the brave burghers, thinking the poor lady was wounded, ran
forward from the cover under which they were firing, and carried her
on their shoulders. It was quite a miracle that not one of the party
was touched by a shot. The burghers having thus got us through the
principal danger, conducted us by bye ways and back lanes to a house
of great safety where we remained until the next morning, when we were
obliged to go still further off, and to break up the party by securing
such apartments as we could obtain in different hotels lower down in
the town.”

       *       *       *       *       *

We went to-day to see another of the great machine manufactories of
Belgium, the works of _La Société du Renard_, which are the property
of a joint stock company, who purchased them from their original
proprietor. Though on a vast scale, they are by no means so extensive
as the Phœnix at Ghent; they are calculated for the production of
every description of machinery, but chiefly of locomotive engines, and
the heavier articles. The establishment is fitted up for five hundred
workmen, but at the time of our visit, it had not employment for
more than fifty. The chief apartment is one spacious workshop nearly
square, covered in, and so extensive, as to be traversed by a railway
for the convenience of moving the heavier pieces. The directors had no
orders in hand at the moment, but were preparing some locomotives upon
speculation. The cost of one of these of thirty horse power, is about
40,000 francs.[2] I cannot but fear, that these large establishments
have been inconsiderately run up in Belgium, and that the recent demand
for machinery, both for railroads and factories, has given a hectic
air of prosperity to Belgian manufactures, that has led to investments
of this kind, far beyond her real wants. Even at present we find an
universal protestation, that the quantity of machinery already in
action, is more than sufficient to supply all the demands of her trade.
At Ghent, we found the Phœnix works fully employed, a circumstance
obviously accounted for, by the simultaneous erection of three joint
stock spinning mills, but we were told, on the spot, that when the
orders for these were completed, it was not clearly discernible whence
others of similar importance were to come. In other parts of Belgium,
the same diminution of employment is seriously felt, and the Renard is,
as I have stated, almost at a stand still. The railroads of Belgium,
when once supplied with engines, cannot possibly be expected to keep
so many and so extensive works in regular employment, and even now I
observed under a shed at the station of Ghent, two English locomotive
engines from Newcastle, neither of which had yet been used, but which
were laid aside as a reserve. The capital sunk in the Renard, is said
to be 700,000 francs, and besides it, there are three minor houses of
the same kind in Brussels.

Except some print works, bleach-greens, and others connected with the
cotton trade, Brussels cannot be said to have any manufactures of
importance. The carpets which bear its name, are all woven at Tournai,
but the competition of England, has seriously interfered with them in
the production of the ordinary articles, the importation of which into
Belgium has increased since 1830, from the value of twenty thousand
francs, to one hundred and thirty thousand annually. But in those
articles which are more peculiarly incidental to a capital, carriages,
musical instruments, jewellery, and furniture, the reputation of
Brussels stands deservedly high. The carriages, especially, which one
sees in Brussels, are remarkable for their elegance and substantial
finish. The public conveyances also, the fiacres and vigilantes
are superior to those of any city I know on the continent. It is
remarkable, however, that in common with every other handicraft, the
coach-makers of Belgium are complaining of depression, there were
eighteen establishments of this kind in Brussels in 1838, of whom one
half only were to be found in 1839.[3]

One most flourishing branch of trade in Brussels, is that of books;
and more especially of reprints of French and foreign literature,
with which it plentifully supplies almost every country of Europe.
The value of the volumes thus produced annually, is estimated at
upwards of _six millions_ of francs, of which _two millions_, at
least, are for contrefaçons of foreign literature. In point of price
they are much below that of France, notwithstanding that their paper
is more expensive, nor is cheapness their only recommendation, their
typographical beauty is of the highest order, and some of their
_éditions de luxe_, illustrated by wood-cuts, and arabesques are in
every way equal to those of Paris, and much superior to any attempts
hitherto made in England, where the hardness of our sized paper,
prevents the engravings from delivering a rich impression, and our
pressmen accustomed only to work with it, want that delicacy of hand,
which is essential to use the soft and spungy paper of the French and
Belgians.

       *       *       *       *       *

The railroad took us to Antwerp, a distance of thirty-four miles, in
something more than an hour and a half. As usual the country lay as
level as a bowling-green, and now and then the line of the railway
intersecting the old paved highway, shewed on either side a vista
of elms and poplars, as straight as the flight of an arrow, and so
long that no opening was discernible in the distant perspective:
occasionally we flew past some Dutch looking country box, with its
red roof and whitened walls, its clipped hedges and grave looking
garden, with parterres of sunflowers and dahlias; and here and there
a grim little château, surrounded at each angle by a turret, like
a pepper-box, and covered by a tiled roof, as tall and as sharp as
the peaked hat of a burgomaster, seated in a coppice of alders and
firs, and looking as primitive and secluded as if the railroad were
the first visitant that had broken in upon its retirement from time
immemorial. One of these pompous little manor houses, at some distance
from the road between Malines and Brussels, was a residence of Rubens;
and another called the Dry Thoren or Three Towers, not far from it
at Perck, was the property of Teniers. The intention of the great
perpendicularity in the roofs, in the Low Countries, was to prevent
the lodgment of snow in their severe winters, and in the towns were
building ground was so extremely valuable, to obtain rooms for storing
fuel and other bulky articles, without trenching upon the space below.

The road between Malines and Antwerp, passes through the hamlet of
Rosendael, (the Vale of Roses) where there was formerly a rich abbey of
Cistercian monks. Duffill, a small manufacturing town, and a village
bearing the remarkable name of _Vieux Dieu_, from a pagan temple,
which is said to have been erected there at some remote period, and
the site of which is pointed out in a clump of elms, a “sacred grove,”
within which an altar is still erected on the occasion of any religious
procession in the parish. Approaching Antwerp, the surface of the land
becomes more uneven, much of it has been recovered from the rivers
which traverse it, and is sunk in deep rich _polders_, which the roads
traverse upon raised causeways. The agricultural toil seemed here to be
extensively shared by the women, who were busied in its most laborious
processes.

The first feature of Antwerp is the soaring and majestic tower of its
Cathedral, springing from three to four hundred feet above the level
plain. Beyond any comparison, this is the most chaste and beautiful
steeple I have ever seen, its extraordinary height between three and
four hundred feet, being less surprising than its airy and graceful
lightness. It tapers up arch above arch, not in solid masonry, but
pierced with innumerable openings, through which the clear blue sky is
seen through the gothic net-work of its minarets and spandrils. It was
of this handsome spire, that Charles V. said, it should be preserved
under glass, and Napoleon with more vraisemblance, observed, that it
reminded him of _Mechlin lace_. The entrance to the city, by the Porte
de Borgerhout, gives a striking impression of its great strength,
its fortifications rising in huge mounds of brickwork, above broad
and river-like fosses, and the road after passing draw-bridge after
draw-bridge entering a ponderous arch, apparently hollowed out of the
ramparts, on emerging from which the wheels rattle and re-echo over the
rough pavement of the narrow gloomy streets, that lead into the heart
of the city.

Its appearance is like that of all the other ancient fortified towns
of the Low Countries, where the circuit of the city, being girt in
and determined by the line of the walls, the necessity of economizing
space led to the construction of gloomy passages, and lofty houses
that overshadow the street, and keep the sun from ever shining upon
the pavement. Towards the centre of the town, however, there are some
ample streets, and a lively square, the _Place Vert_, planted with
trees and surrounded on all sides by hotels, cafés, and modern houses
of great elegance. In the _Place de Mer_, there is a spacious mansion,
surmounted by the royal arms, which is dignified with the name of a
palace, but was merely the mansion of a merchant of Antwerp, and was
purchased by Napoleon, as a residence for himself and his marshals, on
their temporary visits to the city. It is still retained for the same
purpose by King Leopold. In an adjoining street, which bears his name,
is the house and garden of Rubens, the site of which he purchased from
the corporation of the Arquebusiers, whose hall was next door, in
exchange for his great picture in the Cathedral, of the “Descent from
the Cross.” The generality of the houses are built of dark sand-stone,
without any architectural decoration, except their castellated gables,
which, as usual, are turned upon the street; the windows are generally
furnished with espions, and at many of the corners, niches in which are
seated tawdry Madonnas, covered with a profusion of brocade and copper
lace. The weather became rainy before we left, and this together with
the want of footways to the streets, the filth of the centre, and the
odours which the unusual stream of water awoke from every sewer, left
our impression of the domestic comforts of Antwerp, less agreeable,
than it might have been, had we seen it under the influence of light
and sunshine.

Antwerp like all its fellow cities in Belgium, boasts an origin of
obscure antiquity, so remote as the fifth or sixth century, it is
said,--but at all events in the tenth, it was of sufficient importance
to constitute a Marquisate for Godfrey of Bouillon, the hero of Tasso,
and the King of Jerusalem, the unexpected arrival of whose followers
from the Holy Land, in January 1100, has been commemorated in a
festival still observed by the women of Antwerp, as the Vroukens-Avond,
or the _Ladies’ Eve_, in remembrance of the domestic fêtes which
welcomed their return.

Two hundred years after, it was annexed along with the province of
Lower Lorraine, to the Duchy of Flanders, and along with it passed
successively under the dominion of Burgundy, Germany and Spain, sharing
in all the vicissitudes and disasters which befel the rest of the
Netherlands, under their various dynasties.

Antwerp contests with Holland and Germany, the glory of the discovery
of printing. Little books of devotion, printed there, from solid
blocks, early in the fourteenth century, are still in existence;
numbers of volumes in moveable types, bear its name and the date of
1476; and during the sixteenth century, in the days of Plantin, it
was one of the most extensive seats of printing in Europe, all the
productions of its press, and especially its classics, being in the
highest repute.

The original citadel and fortifications were erected by Philip II,
which were strengthened and enlarged in the reign of Charles V,
at a time when Antwerp was one of the first commercial cities in
Europe. Its manufactures of linen and silk were then exported to
every part of the world; its woollen trade was the parent of the same
manufacture in Great Britain, and its local historians, perhaps with
some exaggeration, describe its commerce as so flourishing, that the
population supported by it, exceeded one hundred thousand souls,
(though one is puzzled to discover where they found accommodation
within its walls) and fifty thousand sailors and travellers on the
river and in the faubourgs; and Scribanius declares that he has seen
2500 vessels in the Scheldt at a time, of which five hundred daily
entered the river, whilst two thousand lay at anchor before the
city; but, “_pour être témoin véridique, il ne suffit pas toujours
d’être témoin oculaire_.” It was in this era of its splendour, that
one of its merchants entertaining Charles V, at a banquet, kindled a
fire of cinnamon, then a costly rarity, with the Emperor’s bond for
two millions of florins, observing, “that the honor of having such a
guest at his table, was infinitely more precious than the gold.” Its
prosperity was, however, annihilated a century later, when at the
treaty of Munster, which closed the Thirty years’ war in 1648, Holland
had sufficient influence to obtain the closing of the Scheldt. For
nearly one hundred and fifty years, this noble river flowing through
the midst of one of the most active and industrious countries in
Europe, was forbidden to be navigated by a single native sail, every
vessel which bore produce for Antwerp, being compelled to transfer
her cargo to a Dutchman under whose flag alone it could reach its
destination. This unnatural embargo was terminated by the French in
1794, and Antwerp under the dominion of France, rose again into new and
augmented importance.

Napoleon, enamoured of his theory, that France was nothing unless
with the Rhine for her eastern boundary, and the Scheldt for the
northern station of her navy, conceived numerous projects for its
realization. At one time planning to build a city at Terneuse, at
another, fixing on the vast alluvial plain that surrounds the Tête de
Flandres, but finally determining to make Antwerp, herself, the object
of his ambitious care, and render her, in his own words, “a pistol,
perpetually at the throat of England.” With this view, its military
defences were all restored--huge basins constructed at the east of the
city, capable of floating, one twelve, and the other forty vessels
of the line, and store-houses, rope-walks, and sail manufactories;
everything, in short, for the equipment of an arsenal, were prepared
upon a gigantic scale.

In acknowledgment of these magnificent favours conferred upon their
city, the merchants of Antwerp presented Napoleon with a frigate,
fully equipped and stored. In 1807, ten vessels of the line had been
built at Antwerp; in 1813, _thirty_ ships of war had been launched, and
fourteen others were still upon the stocks. The fall of the Emperor,
however, preceded that of his intended victim, and by the treaty of
Paris in 1814, his vast constructions at Antwerp were ordered to be
demolished--his buildings and magazines were all destroyed--the vessels
of war found within the basins, were portioned out between Louis XVIII
and the Prince of Orange, and the docks, alone, were spared from
destruction, partly from the difficulty of accomplishing it, and partly
at the entreaty of the merchants of Antwerp, as a harbour of refuge for
their ships, which were liable to serious injury from the ice, which,
in winter, is borne down the swollen current of the Scheldt.

The period of its union with Holland, however, from 1815 to 1830, may
be said to have been the golden age of Antwerp. Its situation for
trade is by far more favourable than either Rotterdam or Amsterdam,
and being admitted, along with them, to an equal participation in all
the resources of the kingdom, it rapidly outstripped them in every
department of trade, so much so, that, at the period of the revolution,
“_Antwerp did more business, in every article of colonial produce, with
the exception of tobacco, than Amsterdam and Rotterdam united._”[4]
The events of the revolution put an instantaneous check to this
career of affluent prosperity; Antwerp, compelled to form a portion
of the independent kingdom without colonies, or commerce, or foreign
relations, found her shipping laid up idle in her docks, and her
merchants, conscious of the ruin which had overwhelmed their prospects
at home, transferred their capital, and their exertions to Holland, and
united their fate to that of their now triumphant rivals. In 1838, all
the ports of Belgium possessed but one hundred and eighty-four sail of
merchant vessels, of whom one hundred and fifty-two were employed
merely in the coasting and channel trade, and thirty-two in foreign
voyages, whilst, in the same year, Holland had no less than 1400 sail.

From the events of 1830, and their results, Antwerp never has, and
never can, thoroughly recover. For some years after the Repeal of the
Union, her quays and harbour were literally motionless and empty; and,
at the present moment, even with occasional revivals, her trade appears
to have only the fate of Venice or of Genoa in prospect. Her chief
employment is in carrying the raw material which is to supply her own
manufactures, and which she must do at a disadvantage in freights, as
her shipments in return fall far short of her importations. Of 2662
Belgian vessels, which cleared out from her various ports between 1831
and 1836, no less than 739 _went out in ballast_!

In the years immediately succeeding the revolution, the shipping trade
of Antwerp seemed to undergo an absolute paralysis. In 1829, the year
preceding the Repeal of the Union, 1028 vessels entered the port,
amounting to a tonnage of 160,658 tons. In 1831, the year after the
Repeal, only 398 vessels entered the Scheldt with a tonnage of 53,303
tons! Since that period, a superficial glance at the returns, would
lead to a belief that the trade had more than recovered itself.

  In 1832 1,254 vessels entered with a tonnage of 150,294
     1833 1,104                                   129,607
     1834 1,064                                   141,465
     1835 1,089                                   153,243
     1836 1,245                                   176,079
     1837 1,426                                   225,030
     1838 1,538                                   257,048
     1829   955                                   136,456
     1830 1,028                                   160,658

But on coming to scrutinize this table by the test of the relative
quantities in cargo and in ballast, the air of prosperity grows
fainter, and the real nature of the trade more distinct. It appears by
the following table, that of 5694 which _arrived_ in all the ports of
Belgium in the years 1835, 1836 and 1837, the entire were freighted
with cargoes, except 141. Whilst of 5707 which cleared _outwards_ in
the same time, no less than 1833 left Belgium in ballast, in other
words arrived with the produce of other countries, but departed without
carrying away any Belgian manufacture in return.

    STATEMENT _of number and tonnage of vessels, distinguishing Belgian
    from Foreign, and vessels with cargoes and those in ballast, which
    arrived and departed at ports in Belgium, during each year, from
    1835 to 1837_.

  +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
  |           |                     BELGIAN.                     |
  |  Years.   +-----------------+--------------+-----------------+
  |           |  With Cargoes.  | In Ballast.  |     Total.      |
  +-----------+-------+---------+-----+--------+-------+---------+
  | Inwards.  |  No.  |  Tons.  | No. | Tons.  |  No.  |   Tons. |
  |   1835    |  472  |  47,409 |   6 |    408 |  478  |  47,817 |
  |   1836    |  493  |  67,808 |   5 |    295 |  498  |  68,102 |
  |   1837    |  540  |  71,282 |  24 |  2,004 |  564  |  73,346 |
  +-----------+-------+---------+-----+--------+-------+---------+
  | Outwards. |       |         |     |        |       |         |
  |   1835    |  402  |  41,522 |  72 |  6,529 |   474 |  48,051 |
  |   1836    |  422  |  56,665 |  99 | 13,436 |   521 |  70,101 |
  |   1837    |  438  |  57,355 | 116 | 16,303 |   554 |  73,658 |
  +-----------+-------+---------+-----+--------+-------+---------+

  +-----------+--------------------------------------------------+
  |           |                     FOREIGN.                     |
  |  Years.   +-----------------+--------------+-----------------+
  |           |  With Cargoes.  | In Ballast.  |     Total.      |
  +-----------+-------+---------+-----+--------+-------+---------+
  | Inwards.  |  No.  |  Tons.  | No. |  Tons. |  No.  |  Tons.  |
  |   1835    | 1,316 | 160,104 |  48 |  4,877 | 1,364 | 164,981 |
  |   1836    | 1,289 | 160,378 |  40 |  4,073 | 1,329 | 164,451 |
  |   1837    | 1,443 | 214,739 |  18 |    886 | 1,461 | 215,625 |
  +-----------+-------+---------+-----+--------+-------+---------+
  | Outwards. |       |         |     |        |       |         |
  |   1835    |   916 | 105,545 | 457 | 61,711 | 1,373 | 167,256 |
  |   1836    |   869 | 105,224 | 476 | 59,863 | 1,345 | 165,087 |
  |   1837    |   827 | 131,088 | 613 | 84,497 | 1,440 | 215,585 |
  +-----------+-------+---------+-----+--------+-------+---------+

Antwerp and Ostend are suffering, also, by being defrauded of their
fair proportion of legitimate commerce by the extensive system of
contrabandism, which prevails upon all the Belgian frontiers, and
is carried on in foreign vessels; a loss to which they would not be
subject, were the government in a position to protect the portion of
trade to which the country must still give employment, by an effectual
system of the _douane_ upon the frontiers and the coast.

Antwerp had once a most extensive manufacture of silk; in 1794, there
were twelve thousand workmen employed in that branch alone. The
number is now reduced to two hundred, and their only employment is in
producing a beautiful description of rich black taffetas, which is used
for the Spanish head-dresses, still worn by females.

Another most important branch of maritime trade, that of the transit
of goods for consumption in the interior of Europe, has been almost
entirely drawn from Antwerp by the Dutch, but the government hope
to recover it, by means of the railroad, from the sea to the Rhine.
Here, again, the most formidable opposition may be looked for from
Holland, whose vessels on the Rhine are prepared to dispute with
her the possession of this important department. Independently of
the fact, that the carriage of goods by railway in England, where
it has been most extensively tried, has not, as yet, answered the
expectations of its projectors; the Dutch, having by their recent
treaty with Prussia, obtained the free navigation of the Rhine, on the
same footing as those vessels which bear the Prussian flag, will be
disposed to make sacrifices in their freights, in order to underbid
their rivals by land; the loss on which will be a very trifle compared
with that which must ensue, if the Belgians are disposed to play out
the same “desperate game with cold iron.” At the present moment, I
am told, that the Rhinvaeders, of from two hundred to three hundred
tons burthen, carry goods for from eight to nine florins the _last_,
from Rotterdam to Cologne. This charge, it is natural to suppose, they
will be able to reduce, so soon as a competition is instituted by the
railroad. The advantage on the side of the latter will be manifest,
as regards the item of time, the journey to Cologne by the railroad
occupying but twenty-four hours, for what may require a number of days
by the Rhinvaerder. But the question is--can the directors, or rather
the government, whose property it is, reduce the carriage so low, as,
with charges of all kinds, to underbid the Dutch to such an extent
as to command a preference? A Belgian gentleman, who spoke to me in
high hopes as to the ultimate success of the railroad in the struggle,
admitted, at once, that it could only be achieved by a dead loss upon
the adventure--_which, however, he said, the government would, as
usual, bear out of the taxes_! Well may the merchants of Antwerp apply
to the concocters of the revolution, the complaint against those who,
“intending to build a tower, set not down first and count the cost
thereof.”

A journey to Antwerp is a pilgrimage to the shrine of Rubens.
Rubens is the tutelary idol of Antwerp--it was his home, though
not his birth-place--his favourite residence, and the scene of his
triumphs; and he has left to it the immortal legacy of his fame,
his master-pieces, his monument, and his grave. Its museum and its
churches are enriched by his principal pictures; and the inhabitants
pay back, in grateful homage to his memory, the renown which his genius
has entailed upon them. Fêtes in his honour, on a style of great
magnificence, had been celebrated but a few weeks before our visit; to
inaugurate his statue, which was crowned by the city, amidst public
rejoicings, processions, music, banners, and all the pomp of civic
triumph. The excitement had not yet subsided, and we found every table
covered with portraits of the great painter, verses in his praise, and
programmes of the recent festivals; and, with every individual, the
absorbing topic was something connected with his name and his monuments.

Antwerp has long been entitled to distinction as a nursery of the
arts. The list of painters which she has produced is quite surprising;
and in addition to those with whom we are familiar, as Teniers, and
Vandyke, and Snyders, her churches abound in pictures by natives of
the city--by Metsys, and Florus, and Jansens, Quellyn, Seghers, Crayer,
Franc, Jordaens, and a multitude of others, who form a numerous gallery
in themselves. Her enthusiasm in the cultivation of genius seems never
to have flagged, and its unimpaired appreciation, at the present day,
is attested, not only by the pride of its population in their public
treasures, museums and churches, but by the vast number of private
collections, at the houses of its nobility and merchants, which abound
with the choicest pictures of the Dutch and Flemish schools, those of
other countries being less eagerly sought after. From fifteen to twenty
of these private galleries exist in Antwerp; and an equal ambition
prevails throughout to maintain the ancient character of the city, by
the patronage of its living artists. We saw an exhibition of modern
pictures, in a room attached to the museum, which contained some of
unusual ability, especially landscapes and cattle, amongst which some
sheep and cows by Verboeckhoven of Brussels, eminently entitle him to
the epithet which his countrymen are fond of bestowing on him, of the
Landseer of Belgium.

The Museum in which a large collection of Rubens and Vandyke’s pictures
are deposited is an ugly suite of rooms in an obscure corner, the
building having been a suppressed convent. It is situated in a little
garden, ornamented, or rather disfigured by some wretched statues, as
if their worthlessness was meant to serve as a foil to the gems within
doors. It is curious that that which ought to be a native collection
does not contain a single piece of Teniers, except one wretched thing
which it is libellous to ascribe to his pencil, and only two of
Snyders. In England, where the best pictures of Rubens’ pencil are
comparatively unknown, and where our countrymen are accustomed only
to his allegorical subjects and ungraceful women, the homage rendered
to his abilities is, I think, rather an echo of his continental fame
than a genuine appreciation of his merits; but any one who wishes
thoroughly to estimate his loftier pretensions, and ardently to admit
his claims to admiration, should visit the Museum and the Cathedral
of Antwerp. Here his pictures evince not power alone, not merely that
wonder-creative imagination that peoples the canvass with the most
masterly compositions, but they exhibit a sweet adherence to nature,
a rich perception of beauty, and a magical command of expression and
action, that makes the canvass record the event it commemorates like a
page of history or the voice of a poet. It is impossible, for instance,
to look at “the Descent from the Cross” without almost expecting the
attitudes to change as the act proceeded, so eager and intent are the
countenances of his figures, and so earnest and real their occupations;
and in the same way in the picture of “_the Crucifixion_,” where the
Centurion has already broken one of the legs of the malefactor on the
left, who has torn it from the cross under the agony of the stroke, and
the soldier has the iron raised to crush the other; one’s very flesh
thrills in anticipation of the scream that seems about to issue from
the excruciated lips of the sufferer. This is a marvellous picture in
every respect, and certainly the pride of the Museum; each individual
figure is a perfect episode--Christ himself, in all the dignified calm
repose of recent death; the soldier, with his hand raised to pierce
his side, whilst Mary Magdalene, who seems in a paroxysm of suffering,
to have been clinging around the foot of the cross, springs forward
in a sudden agony of terror, with her arms outstretched to intercept
the spear. This head of the Magdalene, Sir Joshua Reynolds pronounces
to be “the most beautiful profile he ever saw of Rubens or any other
painter.” Finely contrasted with the stirring action of these figures,
is the expression of the mother of Jesus, who appears stupified by the
exhaustion of her very sufferings, and that of the good Centurion, who
leans forward over the neck of his horse in evident sympathy and horror
at the scene before him.

“_The Adoration of the Magi_” is another picture of Rubens, well known
in England from its innumerable engravings. It is, however, in every
respect inferior to the Crucifixion, though a superb picture. But
there are two charming paintings, the insensible attraction of which
is, perhaps, the sweet repose of the subject; one a Christ exhibiting
his wounds to satisfy Thomas’s incredulity, and the other the Virgin
instructing St. Anne. It is impossible for any creature to sit before
these, and another exquisite little copy of “The Descent from the
Cross,” and to retire from them unimbued with a veneration for the
genius that could conceive and embody such imaginings. There are in all
fifteen paintings of Rubens in this collection, and they are certainly
triumphs of his easel; the gallery at Munich possesses no less than
_ninety-five_ of his works, but after having seen both, I would rather
have five of these at Antwerp than the ninety-five which are the boast
of Bavaria.

There are five or six pictures by Vandyke, but they are in the same
style with Rubens, groups from sacred subjects; and they do not bear
to be placed in such immediate contact with the chefs-d’œuvres of
his master. Vandyke’s unrivalled portraits, and his single figures
are as much superior to those of Rubens, as the latter excels him in
combination and compositions. Their productions are as an epic poem to
a lyric or a sonnet; and whilst Rubens is the Homer of his art, Vandyke
may be well contented to be its Pindar or Plutarch. The rest of the
walls are occupied with the canvass of the other second rate names
which have competed for fame with these great originals, Van Thulden,
Seghers, Jordaens, de Vos, and a picture by Quellyn, which, I presume,
to be the largest in the world upon canvass, as it occupies the entire
end of the gallery, from the ground to the roof, and must be, at least,
forty feet broad by sixty or seventy high. With the exception of Rubens
and Vandyke, in fact, the collection is commonplace. In one of the
halls is appropriately placed, as a relic of Rubens, the gilt leather
chair which he occupied when president of the academy. Unfortunately it
has not proved the tripod of the Pythoness to his successors.

I think it is Dr. Clarke who advises every traveller, who wishes
speedily to map the spot in which he finds himself in his memory,
to take the earliest opportunity of ascending the nearest tower or
mountain, and I am most fully prepared to certify for its advantages.
One half-hour on the tower of the Cathedral of Antwerp will give a
stranger a better idea of its localities and extent, than a week’s
driving around its streets and environs. The Cathedral itself is
situated near the pretty little square called the _Place Vert_, (which
was, I think, at one time a burying-place attached to the church). The
building itself is defaced, as usual, by a number of ordinary houses
erected against its walls, and which, of course, cover up all the
exterior beauty of the architecture. It stands, tradition says, on a
spot of ground which belonged to a monastery founded by Godfrey of
Bouillon. The exquisite steeple, however, was built shortly before the
reign of Charles V., (who stood as godfather to the great Bell,) from
a design which originally contemplated two towers of equal grandeur
and elegance, but one only was completed. The ascent is fatiguing in
the extreme; and as the day was stormy, the vibrations of the tower
were sensibly felt as the wind rushed through its beautiful galleries.
Workmen have been employed for some years in restoring all the decayed
portions of the stone-work, and the steeple is still filled with
their scaffolding and machinery. But the view, long before gaining
the extreme summit, is by far the finest in Belgium, extending, as it
does, over the broad current of the Scheldt, whose windings can be
traced from Ghent to Flushing, whilst to the north, the eye can reach
Breda and the frontiers of Holland; to the south and east, the distant
cities of Brussels, Mechlin, Turnhout, and Louvain. The vast extent
of country which is swept by one of these Flemish prospects is really
quite inconceivable, whilst the absence of a single hill to intercept
the horizon upon either side, renders them as peculiar as they are
surprising.

Over the grand doorway, as we enter below the tower, is a crucifix in
bronze, which was cast from the fragments of a statue which the Duke
of Alva erected to himself upon the Citadel, with the insulting motto
on its pedestal “_ex ære captivo_,” in allusion to its being made out
of the cannon, taken in his first successful battle against the Prince
of Orange at Jeminghem, near Emden in 1568. This memorable statue gave
origin to the distich,

    Cur statuam vivo tibi Dux Albane dedisti?
    An quia defuncto nemo daturus erat?

Requesens, the successor of Alva, in his anxiety to conciliate the
people, took down this record of their sufferings, and concealed it,
but being discovered by the citizens after the “Pacification of Ghent,”
it was by them melted and applied to its present purpose.

Opposite the Cathedral, in the square, is a gothic screen of iron work,
which covers a fountain; tradition says it was made by Quentyn Metsys,
“the blacksmith of Antwerp,” an operative Cymon, who was converted
into an artist by the charms of a Flemish Iphigenia, whose father
consented to her marriage only when her lover had become a painter.
An inscription on a stone, near the great door of the Cathedral, which
enrols Metsys as a “pictor incomparabilis artis,” acknowledges the
obligation of the arts to the attractions of his mistress.

  “Connubialis amor de Mulcibre fecit Apellem.”

The body of the church within is of immense extent, so great, indeed,
that our cicerone ventured to say it was five hundred feet in length,
and half that in breadth at the transepts. The gothic arcades, which
separate the nave from the side aisles are of prodigious height, and
with the innumerable pillars that support the organ and surround the
choir, the coup-d’œil, at entering, presents quite a forest of columns;
“these, and the dim religious light,” falling upon the monuments
around, from lofty windows emblazoned with armour, and the effigies
of ancient ecclesiastics; and streaming downwards from the richly
painted dome give an air of solemnity to the whole as striking, though
by no means so magnificent, as Westminster Abbey. Before the period
of the French revolution, and whilst Antwerp was still the seat of a
bishopric, (it is now appended to the see of Malines), the Cathedral
was one of the richest in Europe, abounding in altars of marble,
candelabra of silver, paintings, statues, and jewels, which were all
despoiled or destroyed by the followers of reason. Among them was an
_ostensoir_ for holding the holy elements of the host, in massive gold,
which had been a gift from Francis I. The treasury is still abundantly
supplied with donations of a similar kind, though of less intrinsic
cost perhaps, and its innumerable chapels, with their altarpieces
and ornaments, its sumptuous choir, and astonishing carved pulpit by
Verbruggen, covered with allegories and quaint devices, form a scene
which is remarkably imposing.

The innumerable paintings which are hung in every space, might,
elsewhere, receive a suitable homage of admiration, but here, eager
expectation leads one only to the triumphs of Rubens. Rubens has four
superb pieces here, “The Elevation of the Cross,” “_The Descent from
the Cross_,” “The Resurrection,” which adorns the tomb of Moretus,
the printer, and the “Assumption of the Virgin,” over the centre of
the grand altar. I never saw a more striking illustration of the
power of a picture, than the effect produced by the Descent from the
Cross. It was closed by its two folding volets when we entered, the
backs of which contain, likewise, two designs by Rubens, one of St.
Cristopher, the patron saint of the guild of arquebusiers, for whom
he painted the picture, and the other, of a hermit, neither of them
of great merit. These engaged no attention, apparently, but when,
bye and bye, the sacristan moved them to either side, and displayed
the astonishing picture within, the effect was quite remarkable--the
loungers and passers-by were now arrested, one by one, as they came
within the circle of attraction, till a little crowd of peasants and
soldiers were collected before it, in the most breathless attention,
and, as if struck with a new sensation, I saw them look silently in
each others’ faces, apparently to discover whether others felt as
they did themselves. One girl, with a basket on her arm was caught at
once, as she passed, and remained with the rest, quite abstracted in
contemplation; it recalled Wordsworth’s exquisite description of the
street musician by the Pantheon:--

    What an eager assembly! what empire is this,
    The weary have life and the hungry have bliss,
    The mourner is cheered and the anxious have rest,
    And the guilt-burthened soul is no longer oppress’d.

    That errand-bound 'prentice was passing in haste--
    What matter--he’s caught, and his time runs to waste;
    The newsman is stopped, though he stops on the fret,
    And the half-breathless lamp-lighter he’s in the net.

    The porter sits down on the weight which he bore,
    And the lass with her barrow wheels hither her store;
    If a thief could be here, he might pilfer with ease,
    _She sees the musician, ’tis all that she sees_!

The genuine admiration of this artless assemblage, was as marked a
triumph to the genius of Rubens, as the pecking of the birds at his
basket of fruit was to the execution of Apelles. I never saw such a
rebuke to the “cant of criticism,” and I could not but feel it to be
a compensation for the judgment of Sir Joshua Reynolds, who, I do not
know why, professes to have been _disappointed_ with its excellence.
The picture was painted for the corporation of gun-smiths, in order to
compose a quarrel as to the ownership of a stripe of ground, on which
they alleged that Rubens had encroached, in the erection of his house
and gardens. Another story concerning it, is that the pupils of Rubens,
in their romps during his absence, had thrown down one of their number,
who in his fall, had rubbed out the arm of the beautiful Magdalene, and
that, in order to restore it before the return of their master, they
selected Vandyke, who repaired it with so much ability, that Rubens
acknowledged its superiority to the original. The painting, like all
the other treasures of Belgium, was one of the ornaments of the Louvre,
during the reign of Napoleon.

_The tomb of Rubens_ is in a little chapel, consecrated especially to
his family, in the Church of St. Jacques; it is situated immediately
in the rear of the high altar and the choir. Its only ornament is an
exquisite picture of a Holy Family, by “the illustrious dead,” in which
he has introduced portraits of himself as Saint George, his two wives,
Isabel Brandt and Helen Forman, as Martha and Mary, his father as St.
Joseph, his grandfather as Time, and his child as a cherubim. In a
vault beneath, is laid the

                dust which is
    Even in itself an immortality.

It is covered by a single slab of marble, with an inscription which
records the talents and the learning of the Seigneur of Steen (Stein
i toparcha), of whom it says, “_non sui tantum seculi, sed et omnis
ævi Apelles dici meunt_. His genius,” it proceeds to say, “elevated
him to the friendship and the confidence of kings and princes; so that
when named a counsellor of state, by Philip IV, King of Spain and the
Indies, and despatched as his ambassador to the court of England, he
laid the basis of peace between his Sovereign and King Charles II. His
family are now extinct, and this monument to his memory, which had
long, as the inscription says, been neglected by his last descendants,
was restored in 1775, by one who was then a canon of the cathedral, and
who traced a relationship with the great painter in the maternal line,
“_ex matre et avia nepos_.””

The church which contains this interesting tomb, is, in proportion to
its extent, the most splendid in Antwerp. In its chapels there are
some sculptures in marble, in alto-relievo, of surprisingly elaborate
execution, and of merit sufficient to entitle them to a visit to Paris,
which they, of course, made under the paternal government of the
Emperor. Its walls are, also, covered by quantities of Flemish pictures
of value, adorned with statues by Verbruggen, Willemsens and Quellyn.

At the entrance to the _Church of St. Paul_ is a “Calvary,” one of
those exhibitions of the sufferings of Christ, that by the coarseness
of their conception and their barbarous execution, create a feeling
of disgust in any mind of intelligence or taste, and to the ignorant,
whom they are intended to attract, must connect the solemn idea of the
Saviour with the most coarse and revolting associations. It consists
of a vast crowd of horrid-looking statues to represent the faithful
priests, holy men, and prophets, surrounding a rock, out of and in
which, a number of angels and saints are flying and walking; and below,
a tomb, with the body of the Saviour on a bier--the whole surrounded
by little holes and recesses, in which the wicked are represented,
undergoing all the tortures of purgatory, in forms and attitudes as
varied, at least, if not so poetical, as those of Dante. The interior
of the church abounds, as usual, with statues and paintings, amongst
which are some of Teniers and Vandyke, and the grand altar is decorated
by a masterly statue of St. Paul from the chisel of Vanbruggen.

The congregation was assembled for vespers when we entered the Church
of the Augustines to see Rubens’ picture of “The Marriage of St.
Catherine.” It is quite opposed to all our protestant feelings of the
decorum and reverence due to the solemnity of public worship, to see
the indifference and almost rudeness with which the valets-de-place
conduct their parties of sightseers around a church, regardless of its
most impressive ceremonies, brushing past the altar in the full blaze
of its panoply, and disturbing the devotions of all who may intercept
their view of a picture. It was almost painful to listen to the “cant
of criticism,” amidst the chanting of anthems, clouds of incense, and
the solemn pealings of the organ, but it appeared to excite no such
feeling in those around us. With us, however, in England, the outward
solemnity of public worship is increased by the impression that it
is the fervent and simultaneous out-pouring of the hearts of a whole
united multitude; whilst in the Catholic churches, except in the few
minutes occupied by the repetition of the mass, the act of worship
is individual and apart, and performed almost by rote, at any hour
of the day, from sunrise to evening. The parties, whom I shrunk from
interrupting, as we slipped past their little _prie dieu_ chairs,
seemed to feel nothing whatever at the intrusion, but raised their
eyes for a moment from their missals, to take a view of the strangers
and then returned to the point where they had left off. This apparent
indifference, gives a bad impression of the reality of their devotions;
but still it was not universal, and I have seen in the Roman Catholic
churches, numbers whose whole soul seemed to be abstracted from all
that was passing around them in the deep sincerity of their adorations.

In Antwerp, and, indeed, elsewhere, but here we remarked it
particularly, the vast majority of the congregation were females, who
invariably seem to be the most devout. I was particularly struck with
a young mother, apparently a lady of rank, and of most interesting
appearance, who walked up the aisle of the Augustines, holding two
beautiful children by the hand, and kneeling between them before the
high altar, repeated the vesper prayer along with them. The innocent
fervour of the children, as with their little hands clasped and timid
eyes, they looked upwards at the splendour of the altar, now lighted
up for the evening ceremony, and the modest devotion of their gentle
mother as she taught them to pray, was a more exquisite picture than
all the gorgeous imaginings of Rubens, with which we had been enchanted
in the morning.

It was dark ere we could complete our visit to the other churches of
Antwerp, which here, as elsewhere, are the great depositories of the
public treasures. We had light, however, to see the exquisite pulpit
in the church of Saint Andrew. This is by far the noblest work of this
kind that I have seen: it represents a boat drawn upon the sea shore,
beneath a rock on which Christ stands, and calls to the fishermen
Simon, Peter and Andrew, “follow me, and I will make you fishers of
men; and straightway they left their nets and followed him.” Nothing
could be more appropriate than the selection of this subject for such
a purpose, and in the church of Saint Andrew too, and nothing of the
kind can excel the extreme beauty of its execution. The figures, which
are full of grace and expression, are by Van Geel,--and the other parts
and minute details, are by Van Hoole, some of which, such as the fish
and nets in the boat are as delicately finished as those of Grynlyn
Gibbons. Against one of the gothic columns of this church, by the south
transept, there is a small portrait and an obscure little monument
in black and white marble to the memory of Queen Mary of Scotland,
erected by two of her maids of honour, “præ-nobilis familiæ _Currell_,”
who had attended her to the scaffold, and had then returned to the
Low Countries. Its inscription records their indignation at her fate,
“seeking refuge in England where her relative Elizabeth was Queen,
she was, by the perfidy of the parliament and the heretics, held in
captivity for nineteen years, and then had her head cut off for the
good of religion. _Perfidia senat: et heret: post 19 captivit annos,
relig: ergo caput obtruncata._”

We dined with M. David, a wealthy merchant, for whom we had brought a
letter of introduction; and if his house is to be taken as a specimen
of the rest, the merchants of Antwerp must indeed be “princes.” It
occupied three sides of a large court-yard, with lofty staircases on
either side of the porte-cochère, the rooms furnished with English
carpets, and the walls, as usual, covered with some excellent pictures
by native artists. It is singular, that the use of carpets should be so
slow in making its way upon the continent; climate is not the cause,
because in countries much colder than England, they equally reject them
with the countries of the south. Independently of their comfortable
enjoyment, they are as much a _picture_ on the floor as stucco work or
frescoes are a picture for the ceiling. We seem to divide the two with
our continental neighbours; with us the floors are richly decorated,
and the ceilings forgotten, comparatively, whilst with them the
ceiling is the great field for the display of taste, and the floors
of ordinary houses are seldom more costly than earthen tiles or sanded
fir. In their palaces, indeed, the idea of an English floor is adopted,
but it is exhibited not in velvety carpets, but in the more expensive
material of an inlaid _parquet_.

The Citadel of Antwerp is now little more than a patch of ground
encompassed by the circuit of its fortified walls; the chapel and the
interior buildings, which once occupied its centre, having been blown
to dust by the bombardment in 1830. The accounts which an eye-witness
gave us of some of the scenes of this siege, were an admirable
illustration of the slight space that separates the ridiculous from
the sublime. The sensible people of the city were, as I have before
mentioned, dreadfully opposed to the revolution, and M. Rogier, and
the other leaders of the “_patrioterie Brabançonne_,” having in vain
essayed to persuade them that they were the most suffering population
in Europe, were about to give them up as

    Wretches no sense of wrongs could rouse to vengeance,
    Sordid, unfeeling, reprobate, degraded,
                    Spiritless outcasts,

when the victorious republicans resolved to carry their arms to the
gates of Antwerp, and achieve its regeneration by assault and storm.
They accordingly invaded the city, seven thousand strong, and sent a
summons to General Chassé to surrender. The general, who had resided
for years in the city, was well aware of its loyalty, and had likewise
been inspired by the Prince of Orange with a confident hope that the
rebellion would yet be stayed without bloodshed. He looked on the
martial display of the “liberators” only as a riot which might be
quelled by the civil power, if it did not sooner expire of itself, and
he advised the magistrates, as the best means to save the city from
being destroyed by artillery, if he were compelled to repel them by
force, to assent to their entrance within the gates, on an express
understanding that they were not to approach the citadel, or molest
the gun-boats in the river, and that they were merely to hold quiet
possession of the town till the commandant should communicate with the
Hague. To save the property within the walls from destruction, the
magistrates complied, and opened a negociation with the commanders of
the insurgent force. The mortifying degradation of this step, and the
violence which it must have been to the feelings of men of loyalty
and respectability, may easily be imagined when it is known who these
commanders were. One was a Monsieur Mellinet, a French officer, who had
been compelled to abscond in consequence of “a suspicion of debt” and
a conviction of bigamy. Another was a M. Neillon, a Frenchman also and
a private soldier, but since a _major-general_ in the Belgian service.
He had a short time before been hissed off the stage at Antwerp, when
an actor at the theatre there. Like General Vandamme, who, when a
barber’s boy at Ghent, had been whipped and banished for thieving,
and vowed never to return unless at the head of an army, _which he
lived to accomplish_; M. Neillon is said to have launched a similar
threat against the audience of Antwerp, which he too had, perhaps,
sooner than he expected, the means of putting in execution. The third
was a Monsieur Kepells, once an artillery man in the Dutch service,
but whose chief occupation had been carrying the skeleton of a whale
round the country, the same which was afterwards exhibited at Charing
Cross in London, and from its huge dimensions acquired the title of
“the Prince of Wales.” It was to these three eminent commanders, that
the opulent merchants of Antwerp were now compelled to surrender quiet
possession of their town. The negociation was concluded by them in
utter ignorance, however, of the real strength of the insurgent army,
but when the gate was thrown open, and the mob rushed into the city,
the gentleman, who was my informant, and had been an eye-witness of
their entry, declared that their appearance baffled all description.
They poured like a torrent of mud through the gate, some with no shoes,
some with but one, some without hats or head-covering of any kind, some
few on horseback, others dragging along two field pieces with ropes,
some with guns and swords, others with bludgeons, but the vast majority
with no arms of any kind,

  “Viribus confisus admirandisque lacertis!”

They instantly broke faith with the townspeople, denied the right of
the magistrates to enter into any convention with the Dutch commandant,
an alien and a foreigner; and proceeded forthwith to attack both the
citadel and the gun-boats, in which they had an idea that there was
money deposited, in direct violation of their specific stipulations.
They assaulted the hospital attached to the citadel, killed some
four-and-twenty poor invalids, and put the rest to flight over the
back wall into the citadel, when old Chassé, reluctant to give credit
to the probability of their perfidy, believed it to be some mistake,
and gave them twenty minutes to retire. But instead of following his
advice, they attacked the arsenal in search of arms, upon which Chassé
fired a few guns from the ravelin in the hope of dispersing them, and
finally hauling down the white flag, he opened the whole thunder of the
citadel, the forts and the fleet in the harbour; he beat the arsenal to
the ground in a few minutes, and setting fire to the great warehouses,
known by the name of the _entrepôt_, which was stored full of
merchandize--the whole were in a few hours reduced to ashes and ruin.
In the meantime, the shot and shells which were falling in the town
were playing havoc in all directions; the inhabitants fled in terror,
or hid themselves in the cellars; the prison caught fire and disgorged
its inmates, and the whole city seemed threatened with instant
destruction; till the magistrates having succeeded in reaching the
citadel, succeeded in appeasing the rage of the indignant commandant,
and procured a renewal of the truce. What a picture of the leaders, the
agents and the acts of a revolution!

The subsequent siege by the French in 1832, when the Dukes of Orleans
and Nemours “fleshed their swords” against the Dutch, was something
equally characteristic. It inflicted no injury or danger upon the town,
being confined merely to the citadel and the trenches around it, and
was rather regarded by the inhabitants as a kind of grand military
drama, which was got up at the expense of Holland and France for their
amusement. The French, in fact, did all in their power to contribute
to its theatrical effect. They had not smelt powder since Waterloo,
except across their own barricades, and they were impatient to make
a grand display for the recovery of their reputation. The operations
were conducted with all the pomp and paraphernalia of a parade, and
the soldiers marched to work in the trenches with colours flying and
trumpets sounding. In fact, so thoroughly melodramatic was the whole
affair, that seats on all the elevated parts of the city were hired out
to view it, and the roof of the theatre itself, being a suitable place,
the play-bills announced, “_the public is informed that places may be
procured at the Théâtre des Variétés for seeing the siege!_”

With the exception of its churches, Antwerp possesses no public
buildings of any importance. The Hôtel de Ville was, at one time, a
rival for any in the Netherlands, but it was burned by the mutinous
Spaniards of the army of Requesens in the sixteenth century, and the
present edifice has nothing very remarkable in its appearance. It is
situated in a curious little antique square, surrounded by old Spanish
houses, and amongst the rest, one in which Charles V was wont to
lodge on the occasion of his visit to the city. The _Exchange_ is the
model from which that of London was constructed, a square court-yard,
surrounded by arcades with groined arches, and supported by truncated
pillars in the Venetian style, with rudely sculptured capitals. The
_Hanseatic House_ is another huge mercantile depôt which stands between
the two basins of Napoleon. It is of vast dimensions and is visible
from a considerable distance on all sides of Antwerp. In an old tower
near the Marché de Poisson, we were told that there were still to be
seen the dungeons which had been occupied by the Inquisition during the
reign of the Duke of Alva and the “Council of Blood.”




CHAPTER II.

ST. NICHOLAS--MECHLIN.

    Quays of Antwerp--Peculiar mode of training young trees--The
      Scheldt--The flying bridge of Napoleon--Story of Van
      Speyk--Polder at the Tête de Flandres--Its catastrophe in
      1837--Zwyndrecht--_Different professions of the Belgian
      saints_--Story of the curate of St. Joachim--Beveren--_St.
      Nicholas_--Dense population--A market--Flemish
      ballad-singers--Ancient drama of Flanders--Tamise--RUINOUS
      CONDITION OF THE COTTON TRADE _in Belgium since the
      revolution_--Its causes--Inability of the government to
      afford relief--Diminution of exports since 1833--Remarkable
      petition of the trade to the legislature--Remedies suggested
      by them--Impracticability of any commercial union with
      France--Or the Zollverein--_Dendermonde_--Siege by the
      Duke of Marlborough--Description of its present state--Its
      manufactures--MECHLIN--Curious old city--The Archbishop
      Sterckz--A political prelate--Mechlin lace--Flax--The Cathedral
      of St. Romoald--The tower--Carillon--Immense bells--The
      corporation of Mechlin--_The tomb of the Bertholdi_--Van Eyck’s
      paintings--_Vandyke’s Crucifixion_--Superiority of Rubens in
      composition--_Church of Notre-Dame_--“The miraculous draught
      of fishes”--Favourite paintings of Rubens in the Church of St.
      John--Hôtel de St. Jaques.


WE started early this morning for St. Nicholas, the central town of
one of the most important linen districts in Belgium, being the great
mart for the produce of the Pays de Waes. Before leaving Antwerp, we
took another walk through its principal squares and along the quay.
The latter which is of great length, stretching up the banks of the
Scheldt, is planted with tall trees, and well finished in every
respect. These trees are trained in the nurseries of the Low Countries,
specially for the purpose of planting in streets and squares. They are
regularly pruned, like standard fruit trees for eight or ten years,
till the stems, have attained ten or fifteen feet in height before they
are removed, and having in the mean time, been frequently transplanted
to render the roots fibrous and hardy, they are placed in their
intended position, with scarcely any risk of failure or delay in the
renewal of their growth.

The Scheldt is here about the breadth of the Mersey at Liverpool, and
we crossed it by a steam ferry, to the Tête de Flandres. During the
reign of Napoleon, this passage was made by a flying bridge, one of
those ingenious contrivances, which are still seen upon the Rhine, in
which a line of boats, attached to a large float, and sustaining the
length of the cable by which it is moored in the centre of the river,
are moved from side to side across the stream, accordingly as their
heads and helms are adjusted, to allow the force of the current to
impinge upon them. The river opposite Antwerp is so deep, as to allow
the largest vessels to lie close along side the wharfs, but its waters,
from the nature of the soil they traverse, are always yellow with sand
and mud, and rush past between the city and the Tête de Flandres,
with a rapidity that anything but justifies Goldsmith’s title of the
“_lazy_” Scheldt.

In the river, nearly opposite the commercial basins, there occurred
in 1831 an instance of heroic devotion in a young officer of the Dutch
navy, for which it is rare to find a parallel. He was a Lieutenant,
named Van Speyk, and in command of one of the gun boats, which had
guard upon the citadel, whilst yet in the hands of the Dutch. It was in
the month of February, and the little bark had been compelled to seek
shelter from the drifting ice, by running into the harbour of Flushing.
A storm, however, drove her from her moorings, and forced her on shore
nearly opposite the city of Antwerp. The efforts of the crew to work
her off were unavailing, and a crowd of the revolutionary canaille were
already waiting on the quay, to secure the prize and their prisoners,
when the young commander went below, and with the aid of one companion
opened the powder magazine, gave his assistant a moment’s time to
plunge into the sea, and then applying his match, blew up himself and
thirty of his sailors, rather than fall into the hands of his enemies.

On landing at the Tête de Flandres, the little fortress which commands
the level polder in front of Antwerp, we drove along a causeway
raised several feet above the level of the plain. This vast alluvial
district was laid under water in 1832, during the siege of Antwerp, and
continued submerged till 1835, when the water was again expelled; but
three years ago, the breach in the dyke, which had been imperfectly
repaired, gave way during an extraordinary tide, inundated the whole
plain, and swept away some thirty or forty peasants, who were passing
along the road to the market of Antwerp. The view back upon the city
from this point is one of the finest imaginable, all its bold and
salient features coming into one coup-d’œil; the river, the noble line
of quays, the citadel, the gigantic Hanseatic depôt, and rising far
into the sky, above them all, the majestic and beautiful tower of the
Cathedral of Notre Dame.

The road passed through the little village of Zwyndrecht, a secluded
little spot embowered in trees upon the verge of the great polder.
The income of the curate, a comfortable and easy divine, who saluted
us from the roadside, is thirty pounds a year, but the saint to whom
the church is dedicated, St. Makuyt, being in high repute for the cure
of weak limbs in children, brings in a handsome income in addition.
The fame of the saint, is in fact, the main source of income to the
incumbents of these miserable livings, many hundreds of which do not
exceed that of Zwyndrecht. The first question of a priest, in fact, on
being offered a benefice, is, what is the stipend? the second, who is
the saint? The reason is this, that the whole contents of Pandora’s
box, all the diseases of mankind have been parcelled out to the various
saints of the calendar, each taking his or her own peculiar department
of the pharmacopœia:--thus, Saint Blaize is consulted for the quinsey,
St. Nicholas for barrenness, St. Apollonia for the tooth-ache, St.
Dorothea of Alois for pining children, St. Œdilia for weak eyes, St.
Cornelius for the hooping-cough, St. Joseph au besoin for ladies who
are anxious for heirs, St. Wendelin for the murrain in cattle, and St.
Gertrude to drive away rats. Of all the most valuable and money-making
are the ladies who preside over the illnesses of infants; not only the
frequency of the malady, but the alarm of the mother contributing to
the fame and the profits of the saint. Not merely Roman Catholic ladies
who laugh at the powers ascribed to the saint, but even protestants,
who, in their calmer moments, despise the imposture, seldom fail in
the last extremity to call in the aid of the priest; they distrust
the profession, but they shrink from neglecting the last expedient,
however, unpromising. If the patient sinks under the process, that
arises from the parent having been too long in applying, and, if it
revives, the faith of the mother receives a powerful inclination
towards belief in the church.

Mons. D---- who was in the carriage with us, mentioned rather an
amusing anecdote connected with the system. His uncle is a priest and
incumbent of a parish, the patron saint of which, Saint Joachim has
under his charge the department of _deafness_. The income of his living
is small, but it is far more than exceeded by the profits of the saint,
who has been gradually rising into repute during the last fifty years
that the old gentleman has had him under his care. He came, however,
a short time since to visit his nephew at Antwerp, and feelingly
complained of a disaster, which was likely to ruin both the saint and
his practice; he had completed his eightieth year, and _had grown so
deaf himself_, that he could no longer make out the complaints of his
patients!

Beveren, a beautiful village, half way between St. Nicholas and
Antwerp, is the residence almost exclusively of rich families and
retired citizens, most of whom are the proprietors of the lands of the
district. Amongst them, one house was pointed out as that of M. Borlut,
a lineal descendant of one of the leaders of Ghent, who distinguished
himself at the battle of the Golden Spurs in 1302.

St. Nicholas, where we arrived for breakfast, is a long straggling
town, with an immense market place, in which Napoleon once reviewed
a division of his army. The prosperity of this little place is very
remarkable and arises altogether from the flourishing condition of the
flax trade. In 1788, the population was but eight thousand, and it is
now upwards of eighteen. The country around is one of the most populous
in the world, the inhabitants amounting, according to the statistical
account of M. Van den Bogaerde, to no less than 5210 individuals to
a square league, of whom sixty in every hundred are agriculturists,
twenty-five tradesmen, and fourteen live by other means.

It was market day and the town crowded by the peasantry, who were
bringing in the flax to the “deliveries” of the several merchants, who
attended from Ghent and Antwerp. M. Cools, who is member of the Chamber
of Representatives for the district, did us the favour to accompany
us over the town. The market place was filled with stalls and booths
of dress, hardware and furniture, great piles of wooden shoes, were
spread over the pavement, and amongst the agricultural produce, was a
profusion of buck wheat (sarassin) which is made into a sort of soft,
sodden cake, by no means unpalatable.

I was amused by a chorus of ballad singers, who occupied a moveable
stage in the market, furnished with a large painted scene, divided
into compartments, each representing some incident in the songs, with
which they favoured a very numerous audience, who were grouped in
great delight around them. I bought the ballad which was in Flemish,
and contained three pieces, two of them drinking songs, which were
illustrated in the scene above, by a party seated in an estaminet. The
song was an eclogue in which two farmers, like Tytyrus and Melibœus,
complained of the pressure of the times, Tytyrus professed to be so
poor, that he could no longer afford to pay his barber, Melibœus
assures him that bad as their position is, it is no worse than it was
under Napoleon, and both join in the refrain, that geneva is the only
remedy against all evils, political as well as personal. The third was
a metrical account of a girl, called Joanna Scholtz, who had recently
been executed for murder, and the different compartments of the scene,
exhibited each stage of the story from the innocence of the heroine,
to her exit at the guillotine. The impression which this latter ditty
made on the nerves of the audience was prodigious, as the female singer
who took the chief voice in it, with the energy, at least, if not with
the elegance of Malibran, proceeded from verse to verse, pointing with
a wand, which she bore in her hand, to the pictorial illustration of
the story behind her. This travelling orchestra with its waggon and
scenery, is surely very like Horace’s account of the chorus, whence
sprung the drama in ancient Greece? By the way, I was told by Count
d’Haneal Ghent, that there exists a copy of an original comedy in
Flemish, of a date much anterior to any written drama, in any of the
modern languages of Europe.

After breakfast we continued our drive to Tamise or Thames, a
manufacturing village on the Scheldt, which with another near it,
called Waesminster, are said to have been so named in honor of King
Edward III. At Thames we went over the cotton factory of M. Talboom. It
is on a moderate scale, having about 6 to 7000 spindles, the machinery
partly French, but chiefly from the Phœnix works at Ghent. The men
and girls employed, work fourteen hours a day, exclusive of two hours
for stoppages. We expressed our impression of the severity of this,
but were told, that it was indispensable, in order to maintain their
position in the market. The proprietor, who expressed the utmost
alarm and dissatisfaction at the state of the trade observed, that if
circumstances should enable the English producers of cotton yarn, to
reduce their prices by a single figure, then those of Belgium must
abandon the manufacture, which even, at present, was not paying its
own support. Like almost every other branch of national industry, the
cotton manufacture which had attained a high degree of prosperity
during the union with Holland, experienced an instantaneous reverse
from the events of the revolution. Factory after factory closed its
doors, some in ruin, others to transfer their capital and industry
to Holland, whose extensive colonies afforded that outlet for their
produce, which they could no longer find at home. The ministry to check
the downward career, resorted to the absurd and childish expedient of
purchasing up the surplus production of the manufacturers, in order
to export it at a loss, and thus get it out of the country and out
of the way, only to make room for fresh accumulation of stock, and
renewed adventures by the government. In this way the trade dragged
on a fictitious existence, exposed to peril by every fluctuation of
the markets of England, and from time to time deluged by importations
made at a moment when it was necessary to get rid of a glut in
the market of that country or in France. For the last two years,
however, its condition has been most precarious and threatening, its
consumers still further diminished by the partition of the provinces
of Luxembourg and Limbourg with Holland, and by an alteration in the
cost of raw cotton, and the unusual preference given to woollen fabrics
above those of cotton in almost every country of Europe. In 1835, those
interested in the trade made an importunate and alarming application to
the government, exposing the danger in which they found themselves and
imploring assistance; the ministers were compelled to admit the urgency
of the case, to confess that their protection was utterly inadequate,
and to propose early measures for their relief,--but the trade bitterly
complain, that up to the present hour, nothing whatever has been
attempted in their behalf. _But in fact what has the government in its
power?_ It cannot give them that which is their only remedy, it cannot
conquer or force for them a market and consumption proportionate to
their means of production. Year after year their exports have been
growing less and less since 1830. In 1833, according to a return
in the volume of M. Briavionne,[5] they exported _a million_ of
kilogrammes of cotton goods; in 1834, _nine_ hundred thousand; in 1835,
_seven_; in 1836, _six_; in 1837 upwards of _five_; in 1838 and 1839,
upwards of _four_; a reduction of sixty per cent. upon the trade in the
short period of six years! In the meantime, as the Belgian spinners
are inferior to the English and French in the production of the finer
description of goods, the importations of these direct, during the same
period, have suffered no material diminution, whilst their introduction
by smuggling and contraband, is still carried on to an extent which M.
Briavionne states to be beyond calculation.

It is a matter to me utterly inexplicable, that under such an aspect of
affairs, the number of power looms has been, nevertheless increasing
from year to year, and Ghent has, at this moment, 2000 _more_ than
it had in 1830. The fact is admitted, and imperfectly accounted for
in a memorial presented this year to the legislature from the cotton
manufacturers of Belgium, who ascribe the increase to the expectation
that the government would speedily redeem its pledge of 1835, and
place the trade on such a footing of protection and encouragement as
would restore to it that prosperity in which it basked before the
revolution of 1830, and in the interim that it was indispensible to
make extraordinary efforts in order to keep the trade alive at all.

The document in which this passage occurs is in every respect a very
remarkable one;[6] it emanates from the entire body of the trade in
Belgium, not from those of Ghent alone, where the revolution is known
to be unpopular, but those also of Brussels where it originated,
of Courtrai, Renaix and St. Nicholas. It makes a disclosure of the
difficulties under which the national commerce is suffering and their
causes; and suggests expedients for the remedy in terms as frank as
they are forcible. After stating that in England, France, Germany and
America, the manufacture of cotton has increased since 1829 from 50 to
75 per cent., they proceed to show that in the same space of time, it
has declined in Belgium not only in profits but in actual amount. “In
Brussels,” they say, “at the time of the revolution there were _four_
factories of the first class in full action: at present there is but
_one_, and even it has ceased to work, and four minor establishments
have utterly disappeared within the same space of time; the proprietors
of such as have not broken down by bankruptcy, taking advantage of such
accidents as the burning of their mills to escape from the trade, or
withdrawing with their capital to Holland. In the face of our country,
with our hands upon our hearts, we declare solemnly that the cotton
trade of Belgium has been sinking continually since the events of 1830;
that it is verging to ruin, and that its destruction is to be traced to
the neglect of the legislature to adopt an effectual line of commercial
policy for its protection.”

After disclaiming all implication of the cotton trade in the over
speculation and imprudences which had ruined other branches in the
years preceding, they go on to say, that “notwithstanding every
circumspection and expedient that, as prudent men, they could adopt to
make head against the storm, they find themselves silently and fatally
undermined by an evil which they have long foreseen, and against which
they have been guarding since the revolution with less success than
earnestness. _They find themselves overwhelmed and crushed “(dominés et
écrasés)” by foreign competition._ Their home market every day wrested
from them, and the little space over which they can distribute the
produce of their industry, becoming every hour more circumscribed and
contracted. Only look to the situation of the trade in Belgium, and it
will present to you something remarkable, and at first inexplicable.
The Belgian possesses all the skill and ability of his competitors;
his position for commerce is advantageous, and in some departments
the wages of labour, if not more favourable, are at least equally
so with those of other countries; and notwithstanding all, we are
utterly unequal to contend with them, and the struggle must inevitably
be mortal in the long run: “_la lutte nous deviendra mortelle à la
longue_.”

“But how can it be otherwise? We share our own home markets with our
rivals, whilst they effectually exclude us from any participation in
theirs. Here is a constant source of our weakness, our competitors
reaping advantages from our errors that strengthen them to contend with
ourselves. The true economy of machinery and the only means of selling
cheaply is to sell largely. But in Belgium the consumption is the least
conceivable, divided and attenuated as it is by importations from
abroad. For printing calicoes, for example, the cost of engraving a
roller, is the same in France, in England, and in Belgium, but from the
same roller, the English manufacturer has a demand for five thousand
pieces, the French one for five hundred, and the Belgian but fifty.
It is with impressions upon cloth as with impressions upon paper--the
book, of which a prodigious number of copies will be sold, can be
offered at a price little more than the cost of the paper, and in like
manner, the printed goods of England and France can be sold for the
bare cost of the grey calico in Belgium.

But that which of all else inflicts the most serious injury on the
cotton trade of Belgium, is her periodical inundation with the surplus
stock of her rivals, which is poured from time to time into her markets
with instructions to force a sale at any price, no matter how trifling.
Cottons, for which in the season of the spring they asked three francs,
are all a few months later exported to Belgium, and sold gladly for one
franc and a half or a franc and a quarter, thus bringing the finest and
most valuable muslins of France into direct competition with the coarse
fabrics of Belgium. These injurious importations take place at the
commencement of almost every season, the printers of France, before
they bring out their new designs, making a clear sweep of the old, and
carefully avoiding to reduce their prices at home, they force them into
consumption in Belgium, which affords the nearest and most convenient
market for the purpose. The crises and commercial fluctuations of other
countries, thus become equally ruinous with our own, but with this
aggravation, that prudence may guard against the one, but no foresight
or precautions can suffice to ward off the other.”

Such is the situation of the home market--the case of the export trade
is equally painfully depicted, and referred without reserve or false
delicacy to its genuine cause. “The success of the foreign trade in
cotton,” continues the memorial, “must have a certain support from
the market at home in order to enable the producer to export with
advantage, but this unfortunately is the point in which of all others
Belgium is specially deficient. Her trade had formerly an outlet in
the Indian possessions of the Netherlands, whose advantages were
exclusively secured to her by the privileges accorded to her flag.[7]
All her surplus productions found here a vent which was every day
becoming more and more important. Was there a superabundance of produce
at home, either from over production amongst her own tradesmen, or
excessive imports from abroad, the merchant could empty his warehouses
into Java, without the necessity of stopping his machinery for a
single hour. At the same time, the market of Holland herself, with
two millions and a half of consumers, was thrown open to her. Such
were her peculiar privileges _then_, but _now_ the opening in India
is closed against her goods--Holland takes continually less and less
of her produce, being supplied, like herself, with the overstock of
England and France--and we have just suffered in the loss of Limbourg
and Luxembourg, a subtraction of 350,000 of our fellow subjects and
customers. These are the facts in all their truth, and one path of
safety alone lies open to us now, the securing to us inviolate the
possession of our home consumption. This you can effect for us only
by compelling our foreign competitors to retire from that position
which they have hitherto been permitted to take up in our market by
negligence, and by putting an end to their frauds upon the revenue.
You must either be prepared to do this, _or to annex us to some
more extended territory_, ‘ou vous nous adjoindrez à un plus grand
territoire.’

We call upon you then as our representatives to take effectual
steps for securing to us our legitimate rights, that is to say, the
undisturbed enjoyment of the only market that has been left to us, _or
to supply its place either by a commercial union with France, or by an
accession to the commercial league of Germany_. We call upon you to
adopt these measures without farther delay--our sufferings are keen and
they have been of long endurance--and, if in spite of every effort to
save us, you at last discover its impossibility, we entreat of you, as
a last favour, at least to say so openly. We shall then avail ourselves
of such an announcement to shorten our struggles, and to bring to a
close sacrifices and exertions that have swallowed up our capital and
our time. You, at least, may obtain for us this, that our government
will tell us _what it means to do_. _Ten thousand families_ are hanging
upon us for bread--fifty thousand individuals, men, women and children,
spread over town and country, and dispersed through every province,
depend upon our establishments for employment, and when this fails,
they have no other resource to fly to. It remains with you to preserve
to Belgium a branch of her industry which firm determination may yet
retrieve, and which only requires vigorous resolution to free it from
the tribute which it now pays to the stranger.”

This importunate document produced, as might have been anticipated no
beneficial result--the government have not the power to aid them--their
three propositions are all alike beyond their reach;--to effectually
suppress smuggling from abroad would require a custom house police,
which along so vast a frontier and so extensive a coast, would cost
more than all the trade it would protect could afford to pay;--and to
gain commercial advantages by a treaty with France is as hopeless a
suggestion, as the proposal of a junction with the Prussian league has
proved impracticable and abortive. The ultimate preservation of the
cotton trade of Belgium, in all its branches of spinning, weaving and
printing, seems to me utterly hopeless by any ordinary policy, and only
to be achieved by a resort to some expedient as yet untried.

From Tamise, we drove through a richly planted country along the left
bank of the Scheldt to Dendermonde, or as it is called, Termonde.
This is a gloomy old town, very silent and unattractive, with nothing
remarkable except its huge fortifications, and these I am as unable
to describe as my Uncle Toby was, before he got his map, to make his
audience comprehend “the differences and distinctions between the scarp
and counter-scarp--the glacis and the covered way--the half-moon and
the ravelin.”

Our associations with the name of Dendermonde are all

    “Of vallies and retires, and trenches, tents,
    Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
    Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,
    Of prisoners ransomed, and of soldiers slain,
    And all the currents of a heady fight.”

In the great square, which is close by the banks of the river, stands
the Town Hall, a flat looking building, and beside it, a news room
and saloon for balls, but all seemed to be deserted, and we scarcely
saw twenty persons within the walls. A sight of it is sufficient
to satisfy one of the practicability of the expedient resorted to
by Vendome, in 1706, when defending the town against the Duke of
Marlborough, (or rather his brother, who conducted the siege) of laying
the country under water up to the walls of the town. By a singular
coincidence, however, the expedient proved unsuccessful, as the waters
of the Scheldt fell so low as to reduce the floods on the lowlands to
a fordable depth. The Duke, in his letter to Lord Godolphin, says:
“Dendermonde could never have been taken but by the hand of God,
which gave us seven weeks without rain. The rain began the very next
day after we had possession, and continued till the evening. I believe
the King of France will be a good deal surprised, when he shall have
heard that the garrison has been obliged to surrender themselves
prisoners of war, for upon being told that the preparations were making
for the siege, he said: '_they must have an army of ducks to take
Dendermonde_.’”

Teniers lived in Dendermonde, of which his lady was a native, and the
house he occupied, with a fresco over the mantel-piece of the saloon,
is still shown to visitors. It has some manufactories of cotton and
wool, but the only process we saw was one of those mills for crushing
oil, which as they find both the raw material and the consumer upon the
spot, seems to be amongst the most prosperous establishments in Belgium.

The journey by the railroad from Dendermonde to Mechlin, a distance
of sixteen miles, is performed in about half-an-hour. Mechlin quite
comes up to one’s expectations of it. I had always heard of it by
its soubriquet of _Malines la Propre_, and associated it with the
stateliness and quaintness of “Mechlin lace:” and certainly it is
just such an old place as one would imagine likely to produce such
collars and lappets as one sees in Vandyke’s portraits--quiet,
grotesque-looking old houses of great size, and with rich and sober
ornaments and decorations to the points and gables, tall gothic
churches, and streets accurately clean, with groups of cheerful,
contented-looking loungers at the doors, and here and there a demure
ecclesiastic, stepping silently along in his black gown and silk sash,
with his little three-cornered hat and white bands, edged with black
ribband, and broad silver buckles to his shoes.

Mechlin is full of priests, as it abounds in churches, and is the
residence of an Archbishop. The present prelate is M. Sterckx, son
to a farmer at the village of Ophem, but one of the most restless,
energetic and ambitious ecclesiastics that ever aspired to political
power. He obtained his present See subsequently to the Revolution, but
he is now the leading spirit of the _parti-prêtre_ in the legislature,
and his will and wishes, transmitted through becoming channels, serve
to “move, direct, and animate the whole” policy of the state, in the
present ascendant position of the church in both houses. The Abbé de
Pradt was Bishop of Mechlin under Napoleon.

Malines is a very antique place; its name has been derived from _Maris
linea_, and the influence of the tide upon the current of the Scheldt,
and its tributary, the Dyle, on the side of which it is built, is felt
for a mile beyond the town. It was once fortified, and besieged by
Marlborough and others, but the French levelled the ramparts and filled
up the fosse in 1804. Its lace manufacture has been sadly interfered
with by other competitors, but above all, by the invention of tulle
and bobbin-net, but the genuine specimens of its ancient production
are still in the most distinguished repute. The other occupations of
the population, which is somewhere about 20,000, are the manufactures
of cashmere shawls, and chairs of gilded leather, which were, at one
time, an article of export, so choice was the taste of their designs;
they still engage upwards of four hundred workmen, and are in as great
repute as ever with the Dutch. The district around is as usual, highly
agricultural, and the canals which traverse it and pass by the city,
have rendered Mechlin a prosperous seat of the flax trade, and quite an
entrepôt for corn and oil.

The only objects of interest, and depositaries of art in Mechlin, are,
as usual, the churches. The Cathedral, whose solid moresco tower is
seen from a vast distance, is of great antiquity, though not remarkable
for its beauty. The tower is of amazing height, though unfinished; we
ascended it by a stone staircase, in which I lost count after reckoning
an ascent of five hundred steps; I should, therefore, conclude it to
be at least three hundred feet high. It contains one of those “corals
for grown gentlemen,” as some Fadladeen in music has denominated the
carillons of the Netherlands--a chime of innumerable stops, set in
motion by machinery. But, I confess, that the well arranged harmony of
the carillons is to me infinitely more pleasing than the monotonous
clangour that on fête days in London, disturb the city from its
propriety, or the sweet but “drowsy tinklings” from every church and
convent, that load the air with sound on an evening in Italy. Their gay
and measured melody sometimes strikes so unexpectedly upon the ear,
descending through such a distance from the sky, that it, also, seems
like the song of Ariel attracting Ferdinand:--

    “Where should this music be? i’ the air or i’ the earth?
    This is no mortal business, nor no sound
    That the earth owes.
    It swept by me upon the waters,
    Allaying both their fury and my passion
    With its sweet air.”

Some of the city bells, in another chamber above, are of inconceivable
size, one of them being 15,000 pounds in weight. Whilst we were in the
room, two of the Mechlin “youths” came in to ring the peal, which
always sounds before sunset; and although the one they selected was
the third or fourth in point of size, and they set it in motion by
means of a lever, worked with the foot, it occupied from seven to ten
minutes before they succeeded in producing an oscillation so great as
to make the tongue of the bell strike the sides. On the outside of the
tower, at this height, is a dial for the clock; a circle, the same size
of which, is designed in small stones upon the pavement of the square
below, connected, I think, with a sun-dial; I paced it and found it
upwards of forty feet in diameter, although its counterpart on the
tower looks to be of the ordinary size, such is its extreme elevation.
The guide who conducted us to the top, pointed out a balcony from which
a watchman, who is always stationed aloft to look out for fires, fell,
a short time ago; he was taken up below, as our informant said, “as
soft as a pack of wool.” The tower and its bells are a distinct and
separate erection from the church, although united to it, and belong
to the corporation of the city--a remnant of the olden time, when
every free city had its “belfry.” This corporation seems still to have
absolute power within their bailiwick, and not to exercise it with
due “discretion,” they prevented the passage of a canal, from Louvain
through their streets, which would have been of most signal advantage
to their trade; and, more recently, they stoutly and successfully
resisted the government in bringing the central depôt of the railroads
within the circuit of the city, instead of fixing it, as they have been
compelled to do, at some distance beyond its boundary--a circumstance
which they now sensibly regret.

The church itself is dedicated to St. Romoald, whose body, enclosed in
a suitable shrine, is deposited upon the high altar. In the choir, a
chapter of the Golden Fleece was held in 1491, at which Henry VII of
England was invested with the insignia of the order. In the curtain
wall of the choir, to the left of the altar, there is rather an
interesting monument of the family of the Bertholdi, a powerful house,
who in the thirteenth century, having been entrusted with the office
of “Protector” of Malines, by the Prince Bishop of Liege, to whose
dominion it was attached, succeeded in making themselves independent
of their Sovereign, and for some generations, held absolute authority
as Lords of Malines. The inscription on their tomb is quaint and
poetical:--“_Trium Betholdorum, qui sæculo decimo tertio Mechliniæ
dominarunt hic ultima domus._” There are numbers of other marble
monuments of ancient Archbishops and prelates of Mechlin, but none of
them so interesting as this.

There is a curious series of old paintings, illustrative of the actions
of St. Romoald, which are attributed to Van Eyck, and are, at all
events, referable to his period and school; an inscription relates,
that in the sixteenth century they were hidden, to elude the fury of
the Iconoclasts; and another records their second removal in 1794 or 5,
“tempore perturbationis Gallorum,” to escape the equally formidable
insanity of the French revolutionists.

This church has, also, a magnificent picture of the Crucifixion by
Vandyke; but, however astonishing in its vigorous excellence, and in
the conception of its individual parts, its comparison, as a whole,
with that of Rubens’ Descent from the Cross, or his painting of the
same subject in the Museum at Antwerp, will sufficiently exhibit the
superiority of the latter in the art of composition. Like a perfect
drama, into which no character is admitted, that does not contribute to
heighten the denouement, there is no figure or expression in Rubens’
picture, that has not an immediate reference to the main action of the
moment, and that does not conspire to concentrate all the interest in
one simultaneous movement. In Vandyke’s Crucifixion, however, the three
crosses form three distinct episodes, each tells a separate story,
and thus divides the interest of the subject, instead of working it
up into one overpowering sensation, as Rubens does. But, on the other
hand, this splendid picture exhibits all Vandyke’s masterly powers
of individuality and detail, every figure is a study, and above all,
the beautiful Magdalene at the foot of the Cross, is one of the most
lovely conceptions that has ever been embodied upon canvass. Sir Joshua
Reynolds says “this may be justly considered one of the first pictures
in the world, and gives the highest idea of the genius of Vandyke.” The
agony of the dying thief may be strongly suspected of being suggested
by Rubens. The Cathedral possesses one of the very finest carved
pulpits in the Netherlands, representing the conversion of St. Paul, in
which the terror of the horse, and the fall of the rider, are exhibited
with the most surprising vigour and effect.

In another church, that of Notre Dame, there is a picture by Rubens
of the miraculous draught of fishes, which with its volets once
formed eight subjects, which he painted in ten days for the chapel
of the Poissonniers. The entire were carried to Paris, and only
five returned. Another of his favourite pictures is the Adoration of
the Magi, in the church of St. John, of which he used to say, “c’est
à Saint. Jean de Malines, qu’il faut aller pour voir de mes beaux
ouvrages.” I must say, however, that it did not afford me the same
pleasure, which it must have done to the great painter himself. The
sacristan showed us an autograph receipt of Rubens for 1800 florins,
for this picture and its volets, all of which he painted in eighteen
days. It bears date in March, 1624. The altar of the church was
likewise designed by him, and the walls are covered with a profusion of
paintings, the works of artists of minor eminence, and whose merits,
though they would be recognized elsewhere, are unfavourably brought
into contrast with those of their great master.

We dined at one of the most comfortable and clean hotels I have seen in
Belgium, that of St. Jacques, in the Marché aux Grains, and returned,
by the railroad, to a very inferior one at Brussels, though much more
pretending.




CHAPTER III.

LOUVAIN--WATERLOO AND NAMUR.

    Scenery around Louvain--_The Belgian railroad system_--Peculiar
      adaptation of the country--Policy of Government interference
      in their construction--The average cost per mile--Causes of
      the difference in outlay between Belgium and England--Cheap
      rates of travelling in Belgium--_Accidents_--Success not yet
      decided--Louvain--Its extent--THE UNIVERSITY OF LOUVAIN--Its
      former fame--Its present condition--The bierre de Louvain--_The
      great brewery_--Its processes--Amazing consumption of beer in
      Belgium--Its different characters--_The Hôtel de Ville_--Its
      pictures--Gallery of M. Vanderschreick--The collegiate church
      of St. Pierre--_Legend of Saint Margaret of Louvain_--Tomb
      of Justus Lipsius--Flight of the “brave Belges,” at Louvain
      in 1832--Singular change in the character of the people for
      courage--The present soldiery--_Terveuren_--The park and palace
      of the Prince of Orange--_The Forest of Soigné_--WATERLOO--The
      Belgic Lion--Its injury to the field--Irish anecdote--Bravery of
      the Irish troops at Waterloo--_Hougemont_--The orchard--Relics
      of the fight--The Duke of Wellington’s estate--No monument
      to him on the field--The Duke of Marlborough--La Belle
      Alliance--_Quatre Bras_--The woods cut down--Beautiful scenery
      of the Meuse and the Sambre--NAMUR--My Uncle Toby--The
      citadel--Don John of Austria--The cathedral--_The church of
      St. Loup_--The trade in cutlery--THE DESCENT OF THE MEUSE--Its
      beauty and its wealth--Andennes--_History of Mr. Cockerill_--His
      influence on the manufactures of Belgium--_His print-works at
      Andennes_--Ruined by the revolution--_The manufacture of paper in
      Belgium_--Huy.


THE route from Mechlin to Louvain, which we passed this morning, is the
first of the line of railroads on which we have perceived any striking
inequality of surface; numerous cuttings and embankments occurring as
it approaches the latter town. Beyond it the alluvial and sandy plains
disappear, and the country assumes the usual hilly and diversified
appearance, so much so, that before arriving at Tirlemont, it passes
under a tunnel of nearly a thousand yards in length. The scenery, too,
along the banks of the Dyle, is most rich and diversified, Louvain,
itself, being seated on the skirts of a forest, which has evidently
been a portion of that of Soigné, at some distant period. Fuel must
be here pretty abundant, not only wood being plentiful, and coal at no
great distance, but, in the sunk land, I observed a stratum of turf,
under the sandy surface, which had been worked in large quantities, and
stacked along the side of the road.

Belgium, from its geographical position, not less than the
extraordinary adaptation of the nature of the surface, seems to have
invited the experiment of supplanting the old modes of conveyance, by
an uniform and comprehensive system of railroads. The project was taken
up by the government in 1833, and the plan finally executed, was that
of taking one point, in the centre of the kingdom, and issuing from
it--north, west, east, and south--lines, to maintain a communication
with the sea-ports of Ostend and Antwerp, and the great commercial
outlets of France and Prussia. It is expected, that on reaching the
frontier of these two states, at Limbourg and Couvin, in the Bois de la
Thierache, the enterprize would be taken up by private speculators,
who would continue the chain to Cologne, on the east, and, on the
south, in the direction of Paris. The whole project is in direct
opposition to the _laissez faire_ principle of the English government,
whose maxim is, to leave everything to private enterprize, that private
capital is calculated to grapple with. But Belgium has been so long
accustomed, both under France and Holland, to “government interference”
in the minutest concerns of the nation, even to the prejudice or
supersession of individual speculation, that the habitual policy of the
country may have rendered its intervention indispensible. And as the
entire extent of all the lines projected, in progress, and open, will
not exceed three hundred miles, and these can be completed, at a cost
infinitely lower than anything that has yet been attempted in Great
Britain, the undertaking is not so very gigantic as at first sight it
might appear. One advantage which arises from this undertaking, is that
its benefits will thus be extended equally to every portion of the
kingdom; had it been left solely to private enterprise, those lines
alone would have been selected, which promised to be the most prolific
in profits; and other districts, less inviting, would never have been
traversed by a railroad at all. But the government, by combining the
entire into one comprehensive system, is enabled to apply the excess of
gain on one section, to repair the possible loss upon another, and thus
extend its facilities alike to all. But private enterprise is by no
means prohibited, and in addition to the government works, applications
from capitalists have been already granted, to construct branches in
the mining districts of Hainault.

The average cost of those already completed scarcely exceeds £8,500
a mile,[8] including carriages and buildings. The most expensive
line was that from Louvain to Tirlemont, which, including the tunnel
I have mentioned, cost £11,661 a mile, and the cheapest, that from
Dendermonde to Mechlin, which, as the level surface of the ground had
barely to be disturbed for laying down the rails, cost only £4,583.
This, however, is for single lines of rails; that alone from Brussels
to Antwerp being yet laid with double, though all have been constructed
with a view to their ultimate adoption. The line now in progress from
Liege to Verviers, passing, as it does, through a most unequal and
hilly country in the vicinity of the Vesdre, will, I imagine, from the
numerous embankments and cuttings through rocks, be the most costly
yet attempted. The natural facility of the ground, and the consequent
simplicity of the work, led to one result very different from our
experience in England;--the actual costs of the works, even on the most
difficult sections, have not exceeded the estimates by more than eight
per cent.

In England, the least expensive line yet opened has cost £10,000 a
mile, (in Ireland one has been completed, from Belfast to Lisburn,
for less than £7000), but others have cost upwards of £40,000; and the
average of forty-five lines, for which bills were passed in 1836 and
1837, was upwards of £17,500 a mile _on the estimate_, which may have
fallen much below the actual outlay subsequently. But, besides the mere
facilities of the country; other causes have contributed to render
the expenses in Belgium infinitely lower than those of Great Britain;
in the former, there were no committees of the House of Commons to
enable the solicitors’ bills to mount to 70 and £80,000 for expenses of
obtaining an act, as was the case on the instances of the London and
Birmingham line, and that of the Great Western; nor were there rich
demesnes and parks to be preserved, whose proprietors were to receive
the _prætium affectionis_ in compensation for the damages; nor towns
to be entered in search of termini, where whole streets of houses and
acres of building ground were to be purchased up, at an expense that
would prove ruinous to any but the joint-stock capital of a railroad.
Their engineers too were enabled to avoid the expense, whilst they
profited by the success of the experiments in every stage which were
making in England--experiments which were even more costly when they
failed.

The fares by the Belgian trains are, from all these circumstances,
reducible to a sum much below the cheapest rate of railroad travelling
in England; in their first-class conveyances “Berlins” (which
were equivalent to the “mail carriages” on our lines, but are now
withdrawn), the fare from Antwerp to Brussels was only _two shillings
and eleven-pence_, whilst for the same distance, thirty miles, it was
_six shillings and six-pence_ from Manchester to Liverpool. In their
present, most expensive carriages, the “diligences,” the charge is
_two shillings and six-pence_, whilst those in England are _five and
six-pence_--and in their “chars-a-banc” or second-class, _one shilling
and eight-pence_, whilst ours are _four shillings_--they have also an
inferior trainstill, “the waggons” for which we have no equivalent,
that carry passengers for _a shilling_. As these rates are something
about one-half the old fares by the conveyances which railroads
have superseded, the increase of intercourse has been augmented in
a ratio that almost exceeds credibility. The number of passengers
between Antwerp and Brussels before 1836, was estimated at about 8000
annually, but since the opening of the road throughout, in that year,
they amounted in 1837 to 781,250, and though the numbers diminished,
as the attraction of novelty wore off, in 1838 they still exhibited
an increase of from five to six hundred per cent over the old mode of
travelling.

The rate of travelling does not exceed twenty-six miles an hour, and
in general does not average more than twenty; and by the statement of
M. Nothomb, the minister for public works, of the number of accidents
there appears to have been but one man wounded in 1835, one in 1836,
five in 1837, twelve in 1838, and seven in the six months to June 1839,
when the return was made up. All of these catastrophes are ascribed
by the minister to the wilfulness or imprudence of the parties
themselves, “no possible blame being attachable to any officer of
the company.” One man was drunk, and another was deaf, a third would
persist in riding on the balustrade of the waggon, and a fourth stood
upright in passing a viaduct, several were killed in looking after
their hats; and one formidable accident alone admits of censure upon
the officials, when a train returning at night, after leaving King
Leopold at Ostend, went by accident into the Lys, near Ghent, the
guardian of a drawbridge, which had been opened to allow a lighter to
pass, having gone to drink in an adjoining cabaret, without taking
the trouble to close it! The engine actually cleared the gulf by its
velocity, but was dragged back into the river by the weight of the
train, and the engineer and his assistant killed upon the spot.”

As yet M. Briavionne remarks in his work, “_De l’Industrie en
Belgique_,” the receipts of the railroads are below the calculations
of these projectors; but this is hoped to be remedied in time by a
diminished expenditure in management and repairs; and, perhaps, by
an increase in the tarif of fares, which are felt to be lower than
is equitable to the interests of the undertaking. Sixty-eight out of
every one hundred passengers availing themselves of the very cheapest
conveyance, the “_waggons_,” instead of a fair proportion, as had
been anticipated, travelling by the first and second class carriages.
The enterprise, he conceives to have been unwisely expanded into the
present stupendous system, when the original idea of effecting a rapid
communication with Germany across Belgium, independent of Holland,
would have achieved the grand object aimed at, with a less expense.
This was a sacrifice of solid advantages to ostentation, and has been
followed by financial disappointment; but it arose in some degree, from
the national desire to give independent Belgium an important prestige
in the eyes of Europe. “The _Chemin de Fer_ is then the more popular in
Belgium, adds M. B., because the people can see the intimate connexion
between its construction and the events of 1830; _without the
revolution, we should have had no railroad, and without the railroad we
should have been better without the revolution_.”[9]

Louvain, the Oxford, or rather the _Maynooth_ of Belgium is a
miserable, dilapidated old town, with narrow streets and an air of
dirt and desolation. Four hundred years ago, it was a place of wealth
and importance, the capital of the ancient duchy of Brabant, and the
residence of its sovereigns before its incorporation with the territory
of Burgundy. Justus Lipsius, himself a citizen of Louvain, and born
in a little hamlet between it and Brussels, records, on the authority
of some old tradition, that in 1360 there were within the walls from
3,000 to 4,000 cloth workers, who gave employment to 150,000 artizans,
(an evident exaggeration in amount, that attests, however, the fame of
its past prosperity), and the story adds, that at the hours of meals,
the great bell of St. Peter’s was sounded to warn parents to keep
their children within doors, lest they should be crushed and trampled
by the crowds who were passing from their workshops to their homes!
At present, its manufactures are at an end, with the exception of its
beer, whose fame is known throughout the Netherlands, its population
is dwindled to 25,000, and even within the circuit of the walls,
large spaces covered with buildings are now converted into fields or
cultivated as market gardens for the supply of the citizens.

In later times, the name of Louvain was familiar throughout the Roman
Catholic world, from the renown of its university, which had existed
since the year 1426, and was long one of the most eminent seminaries
of theological learning in the west of Europe. It contained in the
last century no less than forty-three colleges, distributed over the
various quarters of the city, and was frequented by upwards of 8,000
students in humanity and divinity, who obtained, at various times,
from the emperors extraordinary privileges, exemption from taxes,
freedom from arrest, freedom of the city and presentation to the most
valuable livings. The bishops of the Pays Bas were ordinarily chosen
from the fellows of Louvain; numbers of its members attained the
dignity of a cardinal’s hat, and one the Pontificate itself, under
the title of Adrian VI. Charles V and his sisters were educated at
Louvain. The power and the influence which it enjoyed, however, were
not tempered by due discretion, and its houses assuming a right of
political interference in opposition to the government, were suppressed
and dispersed by the Emperor Joseph II. Under the dominion of France,
the university was never restored, as its funds were required for
other purposes, but in 1816, the King of Holland, as a measure of
conciliation to his Roman Catholic subjects, revived its charter and
re-opened its schools.

The principal building, “the Halle” of the university, is situated
behind the Hôtel de Ville in the rue de Namur. Some of the minor
colleges have been thrown down or converted into hotels, warehouses,
hospitals and barracks. Others are still used as the lecture rooms
and theatres of the revived university. The _Collège des Prédicateurs
Irlandais_, founded in 1697 by Cardinal Howard, is no longer in
existence. Since the revolution of 1830, the University of Louvain has
been again remodelled, and its name altered to that of _l’Université
Catholique_, to distinguish it from that of Brussels, which is known as
_l’Université Libre_.

“La bière de Louvain,” is to be found in every hotel and estaminet in
Belgium. We went over one of the largest breweries, that of Messrs.
Renier, Hambrouk and Co., the Barclay and Perkins of Belgium. It is but
recently built, and being an entirely new building from the foundation,
its arrangements are the most commodious and compact imaginable; it is
calculated to brew two hundred barrels a-day, and is now in full work;
its usual stock is 14,000 barrels. The machinery had been constructed
by Sir John Rennie, of London, but has since been increased. I found
here the same preference for high pressure steam engines which seems
so universal in Belgium, the one erected was a low pressure one, very
much to the regret of one of the proprietors, M. Behr, who conducted us
over the establishment. The apparatus exhibited all the recent English
improvements, but what is, I think, considered dangerous in England,
they had a large copper cooler in use. Their boilers were constructed
with one cylinder within another, to avoid burning in the process, a
precaution which is rendered necessary from the quantity of wheat flour
used for their favourite and peculiar “white beer.”

The malt which was on the floors had been allowed to germinate much
longer than in England, in fact, till a shoot of half an inch to an
inch long had issued from each grain. By this means, the saccharine
matter is intentionally so exhausted, that the beer has but little
or no flavour of it. The name of their ordinary beer is Peetermans,
(from an ancient military corps of Louvain, which had existed since
the thirteenth century), and the finer is the _bière blanche_, which
is consumed at a distance in large quantities. An Englishman would not
let either enter his lips, they are both as thin as water and as sour
as verjuice, and yet the quantities consumed everywhere in Belgium is
quite surprising. The annual consumption, calculated upon the excise
duty paid upon beer, which is upwards of seven millions of francs per
annum, and is collected in the proportion of one franc and a half
for every hectolitre, or twenty-six gallons, amounts to 5,400,000
hectolitres, or something above four millions of barrels, _being about
thirty-five gallons per annum for every individual of the population_!
A small quantity only, not exceeding 40,000 gallons, is for foreign
export. The usual price is about twelve francs a hectolitre, from which
some idea may be formed of the “thin potations” in which the Belgian
peasant delights.

The operation of making this light beer is amazingly quick, the
malt is mashed one day, brewed and cooled the next, fermented for
forty-eight hours, and drunk the fourth morning. That for immediate use
is fermented in the barrel _on its end_, a practice unusual in this
country, but which M. Behr conceived advantageous. A chime, rather
deeper than usual, served to retain on the top, the barm and the
liquid forced up by the expansion of the fermentation, which, as the
process declined, retired again to its place, thus keeping constantly
an ascending and descending current, which facilitated the operation,
beside being more cleanly and costing less labour. Every different
district in Belgium produces a different kind of beer, which, curiously
enough, cannot be successfully imitated by the others, thus the brewers
of Brussels have not succeeded in producing the _uytzet_ of Ghent, nor
those of Ghent the yellow _faro_ which is the favourite beverage of
Brussels, whilst both have failed to rival the “white beer” of Louvain.

The great lion of Louvain is its Town Hall, which is certainly the most
surprisingly rich specimen of gothic architecture in the world. It
is literally covered with most elaborate and intricate carvings from
the foundation to the roof. Charles V spoke of placing the Cathedral
of Antwerp under a glass shade, but actually one is inclined to wish
for something of the kind to keep the dust from discolouring the
florid tracery of the Hôtel de Ville at Louvain. It is situated in a
little ancient square in which Marshal Villeroy held a council of war
by torch-light on the night of the Battle of Ramilies, in 1706. The
building itself, which is of the fifteenth century, is small, but its
proportions and ornaments are of the most delicate elegance. It has no
tower, but the heaviness of its lofty roof is relieved by turrets at
the corners. The whole front is covered with bas-reliefs, representing
the history of and the destruction of the Cities of the Plain, with
more fidelity than is reconcileable to modern taste. The whole has
for many years been undergoing a thorough restoration, which is now
complete, every decayed piece of stone being accurately replaced by a
fac-simile of the original carved work. The interior is not suitable to
the beauty of the outside, and an old hall on the third story is fitted
up as a gallery, with a wretched collection of pictures, which are
libellously ascribed to the old masters. There is, however, a gallery
in Louvain of high repute, that of M. Vanderschreick, which contains
a number of superb paintings of the Dutch school, Rubens, Teniers,
Vandyke, Rembrandt, and, in short, a specimen of all its best masters.
It is accessible to strangers, and since the dispersion of M. Schamp’s
pictures at Ghent, is, perhaps, the best collection in Belgium.

The churches in Louvain, notwithstanding the long presence of so
many luminaries of the establishment, are not eminent for either
their riches or their beauty. The Collegiate Church of St. Pierre,
which is the principal one, has a superbly carved pulpit by Berger of
great height--a rock crowned with trees, and at its foot, St. Peter
on one side denying Christ, and at the other, Saul struck from his
horse on his way to persecute the Christians of Damascus. A little
chapel at the back of the altar is dedicated to St. Margaret, the
saint of maid-servants, and is connected with a curious little legend
illustrative of the times. _Margrietje_ was the domestic of an old
couple, who kept an hostelry for pilgrims in the year 1225, at Louvain.
Her master and his wife had resolved to retire from the world, and had
converted all their property into money, with which they were about to
retire into the monastery of St. Bernard. On the eve of their putting
this plan into execution, however, some miscreants formed a conspiracy
to assassinate them, and, disguising themselves as pilgrims, came late
in the evening to seek for shelter at the accustomed inn. The good
old people anxious to perform their last act of charity, sent Margaret
to bring wine in a wooden bottle, still preserved in the church. The
pretended pilgrims then strangled their hosts, and on Margaret’s
return, she shared a similar fate. Her body, however, which they
carried out and precipitated into the Dyle, instead of sinking in the
river, floated back against the stream crowned with an aureole, and
the ripple of the water making sweet music as it bore her along. The
Duke and Duchess of Brabant astonished at the miracle, caused a chapel
to be built for her remains at the back of the great church of St.
Pierre, where her body was embalmed and enclosed in a gilded shrine.
The fame and the fidelity of the interesting saint attracted crowds of
devotees to her tomb, and in time the door upon the street was closed,
and another opened from the church, where the chapel and the altar of
Margrietje are still the favourite resort of the serving maidens of
Brabant.

The church of Saint Michel, which once belonged to the order of the
Jesuits, was one of the most sumptuous in the city: it has, however,
been dismantled of all its ornaments, and its superbly carved pulpit
was removed by Maria Theresa to the Church of St. Gudule at Brussels.
During the reign of the French republic, St. Michel’s was converted
into the Temple of Reason for the district, and the statue of the
Saviour was removed from the altar to make room for the Goddess of
Liberty. The tomb of Justus Lipsius in the old ruined convent of the
Recollets, with its sententious inscription written by himself, is a
curious illustration of “the pride that apes humility.”

    “Quis his sepultus, quæris, ipse edisseram
    Nuper locutus et stylo et linguâ fui
    Nunc alteri licebit. _Ego sum Lipsius_
    _Cui litteræ dant nomen et tuus favor_;
    Sed nomen, ipse abivi, abibit hoc quoque;
    Et nihil his orbis quod perennet possidet.
    Vis altiori voce me tecum loqui?
    Humana cuncta fumus, umbra, vanitas
    Et scenæ imago, et, verbo ut absolvam, NIHIL
        Extremum hoc te alloquor
        Æternum ut gaudeam tu apprecare.”

Lipsius, as a scholar, was the rival of Scaliger; he was successively
a Roman Catholic, a Lutheran, and a reformed Protestant, and after
publishing an exhortation to persecution, died in 1606, in the bosom of
Rome with “_ure et seca!_” upon his lips. Strange that the same spirit
which could prescribe fire and faggots for its fellow-men, should have
lavished all its fondness upon flowers and favourite dogs, whom Lipsius
has immortalized in his odes and epitaphs! Rubens has introduced the
portrait of Lipsius into his picture of the philosophers along with
that of Hugo Grotius, Rubens himself and his brother, with his faithful
Saphir fawning at his knee, and behind him a _tulip_, emblematic of his
love for flowers, placed beside a bust of Cicero; his comments upon
whom, written at the age of nineteen, introduced Lipsius to the notice
and patronage of the Cardinal Granvelle.

It was at Louvain that the Belgian troops, under their new King,
achieved, in 1832, their ludicrous flight before the Prince of Orange,
which fully vindicated for them the soubriquet of the “Braves Belges,”
which they had acquired years before by their cowardly pusillanimity
at Quatre Bras and Waterloo. A few days before the affair at Louvain,
they had made a similar pitiful exhibition at Hasselt, where they fled
in terror on the approach of the Dutch, and yet two years before,
the Dutch were utterly unable to make head against the Belgians,
either at Brussels, Ghent, or Antwerp! The bravery of the Belgians
is, indeed, become a past tradition. Cæsar accords them credit of
being the most gallant soldiers, whom he encountered in Gaul, “_horum
omnium fortissimi sunt Belgæ_,” and Florus ascribes to them the honour
of turning the fortune of the day at Pharsalia. These titles they
have long since, however, resigned; the last fire of their gallantry
seems to have burned out under the Arteveldes and John Hyoens, in
the wars of the “Fullers and Weavers;” for in the troubles of the
Spanish persecution, the military renown of the patriots belongs
almost exclusively to the soldiers of “Father William,” as the Prince
of Orange is still affectionately styled. The Flemings were anxious
enough, in the first instance, to fly to arms when the Duke of Alva
was wringing from them his iniquitous taxes, but so soon as these were
repealed, they were quite contented to leave the Dutch all the glory
of their liberation. Years of repose and peace under Austria, and an
addiction to agriculture and commerce, appear to have effaced even
the recollection of their former valour; they were utterly incapable,
even if they had been inclined to resist the progress of the French in
1794; and the whole series of the exploits of the Belgian soldiers from
Quatre Bras to Hasselt and Louvain, with the single exception of the
affair of 1830 at Brussels, is but a succession of laughable scampers,
almost before coming within the range of a shot.

In appearance, the soldiery, whom we saw at Ghent, Brussels, and
elsewhere, are awkward and diminutive little fellows, such as
one could hardly see cased in uniform, on which the tailors have
evidently worked by guess, without creating a smile, even without
the inseparable association of the _braves Belges_, which recurs to
one’s mind every time they pass. The officers, who are always lounging
about the railroad stations, are much the same, and with their savage
mustachios, fierce black locks, and breasts padded out till they look
like pouter pigeons, they strongly remind us of the military air of the
riding-master at Astley’s.

    Heavens! how unlike their Belgian sires of old,
    Rough, poor, content, ungovernably bold,
    War in each eye and freedom in each brow,
    How much unlike the sons of Belgium now!

Having come by the railroad to Louvain, we hired a calèche to return
across the country to Brussels by Terveuren. The drive is a very
beautiful one, running along the slope of the gentle, wooded hills, at
the foot of one of which Louvain is situated. Terveuren is a pretty
village built down the glen between two hills, with a picturesque old
church on the summit of one of them. It was formerly the seat of some
manufactures, and in 1759, Prince Charles of Lorraine established
in it works for printing calico, and took the utmost pains to bring
artists from Switzerland and Alsace, but it has long since been utterly
abandoned. The park, on the verge of which the village is built, has
been for centuries the vice-regal residence for the Austrian governors
of the Netherlands. It is beautifully wooded, and the irregularity of
the grounds afford some exquisite landscapes. The present palace was
erected by the nation, and presented along with that at Brussels to
the Prince of Orange, as a recognition of his services at Waterloo.
Like it, it has been waiting the fate of the final treaty of partition,
and its gorgeous furniture, which has been undisturbed since 1830, is
now in process of removal to the Hague. The building has no external
beauty, a heavy solid edifice without decorations of any kind, and
its grand charms, its paintings, and garniture, it derives from the
truly princely taste of its owner. We drove home through the Forest of
Soigné, and through the village of Ixelles to Brussels.

       *       *       *       *       *

We left Brussels this morning for Namur through the forest of Soigné
and across the field of Waterloo. The forest is thick with young
straight trees; and any thing but picturesque. The timber is chiefly
beech with oak and elm intermixed, and the trees are very densely
planted, with a view, we were told, to render the wood loose and moist
being withdrawn from the hardy action of the air, in order that when
felled and cut into lengths it may the more readily split, which the
beech does almost spontaneously. The foresters live in huts dispersed
throughout the forest; and along the edge of the road were long piles
of cleft wood ready for transport to Brussels. On the road we passed
several waggons laden with coals from Charleroi, and after emerging
from the forest we reached the village of Waterloo, which is situated
almost upon its outskirts. We visited the church with its numerous
monuments to the “unreturning brave,” and were solicited by some
ecclesiastical official for a contribution to the fund _for keeping
them in order_. At Mont St. Jean we had a most comfortable breakfast
at the little inn, and being waited on by Sergeant Cotton of the 7th
Hussars, the guide who seems to have most successfully taken the place
of Da Costa, we walked with him to the various positions on the field.
One has really no patience with the great hulking mountain of sand on
which the Iron Lion is raised as a trophy of the valour of the “Braves
Belges!” Some one has observed that the pretension of the monuments
at Waterloo are precisely in the inverse ratio of the importance of
the services they commemorate; the English have none, the Prussians a
modest record, and the Belgians a pyramid! on which, as the Brussels
guide book magniloquently points out “the Lion of Belgian proudly paws
the bolt of war, with his head turned towards vanquished France, as
if to menace her with vengeance and teach her the homage which is
due to valour!” But it is not the gasconade of this ambitious trophy
that irritates one so much as the fact, that in order to scrape the
earth together, out of which it is heaped up, the whole surface of the
field has been disturbed and its identity destroyed; and that, at the
most interesting spot, where the British guards made their immoveable
and immortal stand “from day-break till set of sun” against all the
chivalry of France. The mischievous vanity, which has thus destroyed
what it pretends to commemorate, has something very _Irish_ in it, and
is not altogether without a parallel. Some years since a remnant of a
very ancient castle of the chiefs of the clan O’Neil, which stood upon
the summit of the hill of Castlereagh in the estate of the late Marquis
of Downshire, was fast crumbling away, owing to the injury which
it received from the cattle who browsed about it, and his Lordship
directed that a wall should be built round it to save it from utter
destruction. The labourers, however, who were sent for the purpose,
thinking it a pity to be at the trouble of drawing stones up to the
top of such a mountain, where there were abundance close at hand, very
naïvely pulled down what remained of the castle and built the wall
round its site with its own materials!

By the way, whilst all justice has been done to the bravery of the
English at Waterloo, and all the credit to which they were entitled,
_at least_, claimed for the Scotch regiments--it is a fact that speaks,
whole bulletins and gazettes for the gallantry of the Irish, that the
regiment which had the greatest number _killed_ of any on the field was
the 27th foot, the Enniskillens, which lost one hundred and three men
besides three hundred and sixty wounded.

The Château of Hougemont is undergoing a similar change, the wood
which surrounded it has been all cut down, new buildings are erecting
and the old ones fast passing into dust--the gate, however, still
hangs upon its hinges with remnants of the old leaves that witnessed
the great day, perforated by ten thousand bullets--the little chapel
stands almost roofless in the ruinous court--and the guide points out
“with bated breath,” the walls of the barn which was set on fire by the
artillery and consumed the wounded and the dying who had been carried
into it for shelter. Crossing the farm-yard a little postern leads to
the

        Copse where once the garden smiled
    And still where many a garden flower grows wild.

The ruinous alcoves and grass grown walks serve to show what it had
once been--and by its side is the orchard, the possession of which
on that memorable day was to decide the freedom or the subjection of
Europe. It was then piled with carnage, and strewn with “garments
rolled in blood”--it is now encumbered with a bending crop of fruit,
and one solitary grave over an English officer, who was buried where
he fell, is the only memento of that fearful morning. In the field
around it, three thousand French were slain by the well directed fire
from within; we walked over it as it had been newly ploughed, and in
the course of a few minutes picked up a handful of bullets, some
fragments of shells and grape-shot, and a musket flint still clasped in
its leaden envelope--what an iron shower must have rained upon it, that
after so many years, the plough should still furrow up its deposits!

The Duke of Wellington has his estate between Nivelles and Quatre Bras.
Why did not the King of Holland confer on him the field itself? Above
all, why are there so many monuments to all the subalterns, and none
to the great Captain? It would have been surely more just, as well as
wiser, to have reared that vast pyramid to mark the spot where the
conqueror stood, than to provoke the remembrance that those who intrude
themselves upon our notice by it, _four times turned to flight_. It is
even said that a party of the “braves Belges,” notwithstanding all the
terror in which they were scampering back to Brussels, under the panic
that the day was lost, overtook the Duke of Wellington’s baggage near
the forest of Soigné, and coolly took time to plunder it--rather than
let it fall into the hands of the enemy.

Lord Byron mentions his impression that Waterloo, as a plain, seems
marked out for the scene of some great action. This is, of course,
association in the imagination of the poet; but it is a curious
coincidence that, in 1707, the Duke of Marlborough selected it as a
desirable spot on which to encounter the French, and actually encamped,
for many days, on the verge of the forest, in the hope of seducing
Vendome to give him battle there.

At the little cabaret of La Belle Alliance, to which we had sent our
carriage on from Mont St. Jean, to await our arrival from Hougemont,
we got some excellent light wine: at Marengo, some years ago, I got
an equally refreshing draught, after a sultry walk over the field of
battle. Houses are building at this little spot; and, in short, in
every direction trees are felled, ground levelled, walls fallen, and
cottages constructed; so that in a few years the individual features of
the scene will be changed; but that which even time cannot efface--its
deathless renown--will still, like Marathon,

  Preserve alike its bounds and boundless fame.

We took the usual route by Jemappe and Quatre Bras, through the
Waloon country. The flax crop was abundantly spread over the fields,
undergoing the process of “dew rating,” or dew riping, in which the
operation of detaching the cuticle from the wood and pith, is performed
by merely exposing it on the grass without steeping. At Quatre Bras
the wood has been cut down from which the British, under the Duke of
Wellington, repulsed Marshal Ney in the affair of the 16th of June,
in which the gallant Duke of Brunswick fell. The hill is now a naked
height, which is seen on the right of the road to Sombreffe.

The country, as we approach the banks of the Meuse and the Sambre,
becomes at every step more and more picturesque, and the dull
monotonous plains of Brabant are exchanged for the woody hills and
precipitous valleys of Namur. I never saw a more charming prospect,
nor one which is so truly refreshing to an eye ennuied with the
tiresome monotony of Flemish scenery, than the first view which is
obtained of the old town and fortress of Namur, from the heights
above the Sambre, in coming from Temploux--a wide and winding valley,
with the rapid river toiling below between towering cliffs of rugged
rock upon the one hand, and steep banks covered with foliage, and
occasionally crowned with old chateaux, upon the other; and in the
distance, the bridges, towers, and steeples of the warlike old city,
with its renowned, and once thought impregnable fortress, rising
terrace upon terrace, and bristling with artillery above it.

We drove down the steep hill to the river under a glowing sunset,
and having crossed the hollow drawbridge and traversed the tortuous
passages that lead from the outward fortifications to the heart of the
city, we took up our quarters for the night, at the Hotel de Harscamp,
in a starved little square, that seemed to have been grudgingly crimped
off the already pinched and narrowed streets. It was still light
enough for a stroll round the fortifications, but we soon discovered
that it required the acumen of some future Sir William Gell or
Claudius Rich, to determine the precise spot, which we were in search
of--namely, that at which my Uncle Toby received his memorable wound,
in the attack made by the Dutch and English, “upon the point of the
advanced counterscarp before the gate of St. Nicholas, which enclosed
the great sluice or water-stop,” and which he himself declares to have
been, “in one of the traverses about thirty toises from the returning
angle of the trench opposite to the salient angle of the demi-bastion
of Saint Roche.”

The citadel which stands directly above the town is constructed upon
the shelves of a stupendous rocky escarpment, that rises almost
perpendicularly from the banks of the river, and looks like the
Gibraltar of the Meuse. It was accurately restored, and its works in
some places extended, by the King of Holland, some few years before the
revolution, but when that event arrived, Namur was amongst the first
places that hoisted the standard of revolt. There seems, in fact, to
have been something between treason and cowardice in the conduct of
the garrisons, who occupied every fortress in Belgium, and who, with
the single exception, I think, of Antwerp, surrendered them to the
“patrioterie” without lighting a match.

In public buildings, Namur, has nothing to exhibit, except two moderate
churches: one of them, the Cathedral, contains some paintings, and the
tomb of the gallant Don John of Austria, the natural son of Charles
V, Barbara Blomberg of Ratisbon, who assumed the credit of being his
mother, in order, it is said, to conceal a more illustrious parentage.
Don John, who, as the grand admiral at Lepanto, combined, in his own
person, the functions of a naval as well as a military commander,
added to both the genius of a diplomatist, and was invested with the
government of the Low Countries after the pacification of Ghent. He, in
person, obtained possession of the citadel of Namur, by going thither
under pretence of visiting the Queen of Navarre, Margaret of Valois,
who was enjoying the gaiety of Spa, and being permitted to walk on
the glacis, and finally to view the interior, by the young son of the
governor, in the absence of his father, he took the opportunity to
entrench his immediate guard as a garrison in the name of his brother
of Spain, who the next year rewarded his bravery, by causing him to be
poisoned, to avoid a marriage, which he apprehended between the hero of
Lepanto and Queen Elizabeth of England. He died at the camp of Bongy, a
short distance from Namur, in 1578, when only thirty-three years of age.

The other church, that of St. Loup, is overlaid with a profusion of
decorations of all descriptions, paintings, carved confessionals and
gilded altars, its floor is of variegated marble, the columns which
sustain the vaults of the roof are polished porphyry or red granite,
with square plinths, interposed between each tambour in the shaft, and
the ceiling which is of solid white stone, is laboriously chased from
end to end in a multitude of florid devices, so accurately raised out
and under cut, that the whole looks like a Chinese sculpture in ivory.
Tradition says, the carving of the entire roof, was the work of one
individual monk of the Jesuits, by whom the church was erected.

The town itself has nothing else to shew, except its tall gaunt-looking
old houses, crowded into narrow lanes and passages, the dullness of
which is only relieved by the showy windows of its shops, shining with
cutlery and polished brass work, the staple trade of Namur. It divides
this manufacture with Gembloux, a little town, a few miles to the
north, which is as famous for the coarser articles of “Sheffield ware,”
as Namur is for the finer. The prosperity of the trade, however, has
been declining ever since 1814, when Belgium not only lost the French
market, but the protection of the French douaniers to protect her own
from being invaded by the English; her decline was consummated by
losing, in addition, the supply of the Dutch colonies, by the events of
“the glorious days” of September 1830, and the entire of the workmen
now engaged at Namur, do not exceed one thousand. Cheapness is of
course their grand aim, and some penknives which we bought surprisingly
low, we speedily discovered, like Peter Pindar’s cutlery to be “made
_for sale_.”

The Athenæum of Namur has attained some celebrity by the chair of
geology, which was established by the King of Holland, and for the
study of which, the rocky ravines and valleys of the environs present
abundant opportunities.

The Hotel de Harscamp is excellent, and after a most comfortable night,
disturbed only by the thundering moans of a most inopportune réveille,
rung, from the bells of the church hard by, every night at _eleven_,
and every morning at _four_ o’clock; we started, before breakfast the
following morning for Huy and Liege, along the descent of the Meuse.
The same delightful scenery accompanied us, which we had overtaken
the evening before on descending to Namur. On either side, high,
beetling cliffs of limestone and basalt, in every crevice of which,
spring the hardy roots of the little mountain ash, now covered with
its ruby berries, and from every crag, luxuriant creepers hung down
their “lush of leaves,” which the early frost was already beginning to
tinge with crimson. Every spot that could afford soil for the roots of
a tree, was covered with waving foliage, and into the rich recesses of
the cliffs ran up little velvety meadows from the verge of the river,
in which were nestled some of the most beautiful and romantic villas
and chateaux. Occasionally, on the summit of the steep ravine, in the
distance, were perched the buildings of a suppressed convent, or the
ruins of some feudal castle; and the very limestone rock itself, worn
into fantastic shapes by the weather, not unfrequently presented all
the features of a fortress, jutting out over the river below it. The
road ran along a broad, rich plain, intersected by the river, with
fruit-trees planted along the hedge-rows, and yellow crops of corn
which had not yet been severed. The boats were already on the river,
and innumerable cars and waggons were toiling along the road, laden
with produce for Namur--it was precisely the scene and the season
described in Wordsworth’s sonnet:

    The morn that now along the silver Meuse,
    Spreading her peaceful ensigns, calls the swains
    To tend their silent boats and ringing wains,
    Or strip the bough, whose mellow fruit bestrews
    The ripening corn beneath.

But the beauty of the Meuse is its least recommendation to the
affection of the Belgians; and, like the vale of Avoca, and the banks
of some other equally exquisite streams, which are “_sacred_ only in
song,” its picturesque attractions, are, at every spot, most rudely
torn away by the very matter-of-fact speculators of the neighbourhood,
in the search of the mineral treasures which they conceal. Rocks of
black marble are rolled down to the edge of the road, and left ready
for transport to the river; limestone is tumbled from the cliffs,
and numerous manufactories of alum are constructed between Namur and
Schlayen. These and the other riches of the Meuse, its floors of coal
and beds of iron render this rugged defile the most important and
valuable possession of the crown.

At Andennes we passed the first of those vast manufactories, the
establishment of which has made the name of one Englishman more
renowned in Belgium than those of all its native speculators
combined--Mr. William Cockerill. Every district of the kingdom exhibits
some memorial of his enterprise, and there is scarcely a branch of
the national industry which, if it does not owe its introduction to
his suggestion, is not indebted to his genius for its improvement.
He came to Verviers in 1798, an humble mechanic, in search of
employment, returning with a numerous family from Stockholm, where
he had been to erect some apparatus for spinning wool. He obtained
an engagement with a house there to construct for them machinery for
the same purpose, similar to that in use in England, and by dint of
singular talents, unwearied industry, and energies almost unparalleled,
he speedily elevated himself to wealth and importance; mines were
sounded at his suggestion, iron-works constructed, cotton-mills
built, woollen-machinery erected, in short, every department of
Belgian art received a new impulse under his all-grasping and
comprehensive superintendence, aided by the munificence of Napoleon,
and, subsequently, by the equally ardent co-operation of King William
of Holland, who seemed to place the national funds for the promotion
of industry, almost at his disposal. Under the powerful influence
of France, and even afterwards with access to the extensive markets
and colonies of Holland, the vastness of his speculations were not
disproportionate to the wants and commercial connexions of the kingdom.
But the simile of a tub for a whale is no actual exaggeration to
represent the incompatibility of his Leviathan establishments, to
the puny resources of the new and independent kingdom, within which
they were suddenly walled up by the revolution of 1830. The gross of
green spectacles which Moses brought home from the fair, were not more
utterly disproportionate to the wants of the family of the Vicar of
Wakefield.

The establishment of Andennes had been originally constructed by the
act of the government and the King of Holland, for the printing of
calicoes in the style, and with a view to out-rival the English--every
process was borrowed from them, the machinery, the workmen, the
designs, were all brought from England, and, for a time, the concern
seemed to be prosperous. But the events of 1830 soon put a stop to
that; it was useless to print calicoes while there was no stranger
to buy, and no one at home to wear them, and in the course of a few
years, the works were sold by order of the government to pay off their
advances, and bought by their original promoter, who converted them
into a paper-mill.

This trade is now one of the most prosperous in Belgium. She formerly
imported her paper from France at from twenty to five-and-twenty per
cent. dearer than she can now produce it for herself, thanks to the
ingenuity and enterprise of Mr. Cockerill, which gave the manufacture
a new character by the introduction of the machines for producing the
entire contents of the vat in one continuous sheet. Since that period,
the manufacture has advanced with a rapidity that is quite surprising.
In 1836 there were _seven_ machines on the same construction in use in
Belgium; in 1839 _nineteen_, but of these _six_ have now been attached
to Holland by her acquisitions in Luxembourg and Limbourg. The value
of their produce is upwards of nine millions of francs per annum, and
their success has communicated an impulse to the production of books at
Brussels, that has rendered it likewise one of the most important and
promising branches of the national industry.

A few miles from Andennes, after passing a romantic old ruin of the
castle of the Dukes of Beaufort near Bien, we stopped to breakfast at
the foot of the romantic fortress of Huy, which was long considered
as the portal of the Meuse, till its inefficiency was demonstrated by
Marlborough and Marshal Villeroy in “King William’s wars,” who took and
retook it four times within as many years, almost without a struggle.




CHAPTER IV.

HUY, SERAING, LIEGE, AND VERVIERS.

    Huy--The citadel--Churches--_The mineral and coal districts
      of Belgium_--Prosperity of coal mines--Quantity produced in
      Belgium compared with other countries--Its price at Ghent,
      Brussels, and Antwerp--Panic in 1836 for the exhaustion
      of coal in Belgium--Scenery of the Meuse--Remarkable
      individuals born in its vicinity--Chateaux of Aigremont and
      Chokier--_Seraing_--Immense extent of the works--Its produce
      within its own walls--History of the establishment--Palace
      of the Prince Bishops of Liege--Encouraged by the King of
      Holland--The building--Huge steam engine--Surprising extent of
      the operations carried on--Iron works--Halls for construction of
      machines--Vast numbers of workmen employed--Its exports--_Mr.
      John Cockerill_--Extent of his speculations--Development of
      Seraing attributable to them--Its future prospects--Policy of
      England in regard to the export of machinery--_Importation of
      machinery into Belgium_--Road to Liege--LIEGE--No sympathy
      with its history--Turbulent and unamiable character of
      its ancient populace--Prince Bishop declares war upon
      France--Share of the Liegois in the revolution of 1830--Her
      threatened attack upon Seraing--The town--_Manufacture of
      fire-arms and cannon_--A flax mill--Its churches poor--The
      Palais de Justice--University--_Scenery of the Vesdre_--The
      railroad--_Chaud-fontaine_--SPA--Deserted--VERVIERS--The
      town--Conduct during the revolution--_The woollen trade
      of Belgium_--Want of native wool--Extent and decline of
      the trade--Its causes--Statement of M. Briavionne--_Joint
      Stock Companies_ in Belgium--Account of two at
      Verviers--The mania for speculation--Its failure--The
      Prussian frontier--Limbourg--Prospects of Belgium--Her bad
      condition--Policy of the King of Holland--That of the present
      government--Present aspect of their trade--Impossibility
      of competing with England--Character of the Belgian
      mechanics--_Ruinous effects of the_ “REPEAL OF THE UNION.”


HUY is beautifully situated at the angle, where a mountain torrent
pours past it to the Meuse. Its fortress stands on a bold detached
rock, of great height and breadth, around the base of which the town
is built almost upon the sands of the river; and beneath its shelter
are collected the churches, monasteries, and houses of the ancient
city. The fortifications are now in excellent repair, having been
restored after the war by English engineers under the direction of
Colonel Blanshard, at the expense of the King of Holland; but the town
itself is fast hurrying to decay. Its vicinity to Seraing, the seat
of the once powerful Prince Bishops of Liege, rendered Huy a place of
evident interest as an ecclesiastical frontier as well as a military
one; and the church militant below, emulous of the strongholds of
earthly power above, had within the small circuit of its wall no less
than a cathedral, fourteen churches, and a still greater number of
monasteries, abbeys, and convents, all of which, with the exception of
the cathedral and a richly carved gateway that conducts to it, are now
in ruins.

Here, for the first time in Belgium, we saw vineyards and their
“purple store;” but the wine is execrable, and used only for the most
inferior purposes. The position of Huy on the river, and its admirable
facilities for traffic, made it a flourishing entrepôt for grain
and agricultural produce, in which it carries on a bustling traffic
on the river; as well as in the produce of its numerous quarries. A
short distance from Huy commence the coal fields, which extend to
the district surrounding Liege, the working of which was attempted
so far back as the 12th century. In coals, Belgium is, perhaps, the
richest country of the west of Europe, with the single exception of
Great Britain; the districts in which it abounds being, in England, in
the proportion of one-twentieth of her entire surface; in Belgium, a
thirtieth; and in France only a two hundredth part. But her success in
raising them is not in the same proportion, England having produced,
in 1838, _twenty-three millions_ of tons; France, _two millions and a
half_; and Belgium only _four_.

The principal mining districts are in Hainault, where those of
Charleroi and Mons are not only the most productive, but exhibit the
best specimens as to quality; those of Liege, which are next; and those
of Huy and Namur. Some valuable coal mines at Limbourg have been ceded
to Holland by the treaty of 1839, another cause of dissatisfaction to
the Belgians. The prosperity of the mining trade has been affected
by all the changing fortunes of the country; but its general march,
though liable to great vicissitudes, has been in the ultimate result
successful and improving. A few years since such was the rage for joint
stock speculations, and the mania for erecting machinery in Belgium,
that a panic was excited lest the veins of coal and iron should be
exhausted prematurely, so rapid was the consumption of both which the
force of speculation had produced. The price, in consequence, rose
from 50 to 100 per cent, and an application was made and acceded to by
the British Government, to permit the free exportation of coal from
Newcastle to Flanders; but in the year following the alarm subsided,
from very natural causes, and the price returned to its former level.

The quantity produced in Belgium for some years past has not exceeded,
on an average, three millions of tons; and the ordinary price has been
about 10 francs at the pit’s mouth. The cost of carriage, however, and
the variety of modes and distances of conveyance, render its prices at
the various places of consumption extremely unequal. According to M.
Briavionne,[10] the following was the scale in 1837:--


AT BRUSSELS:

For large coals (droits d’octroi included), 42 francs for the ton of
1000 kilogrammes[11].

For manufacture (_gailletes_), 32 francs.


AT GHENT:

  For domestic use      29f. 17c.
  For manufactures      22f.  6c.
  For slack             18f. 16c.


AT ANTWERP:

  For large coals       36f. 55c.
  For manufacture       26f. 30c.
  For slack             22f. 30c.

The price of coals in England, at the same period, was _twenty-two_
to _twenty-three_ shillings for what cost _thirty-five_ at Brussels;
and from sixteen to twenty for the others, for which the Belgians paid
from _twenty-five_ to _twenty-seven_. The cost at the pit’s mouth, at
the same time, was but a shade higher at Newcastle than at Hainault or
Liege,[12] so relatively imperfect are the means of communication in
Belgium as contrasted with those of Great Britain; and, besides, the
coal floors are much more accessible and thicker in the latter country
than in the other, where the upper strata has been already pretty well
exhausted by upwards of six hundred years of continued workings.

We left Huy by the bridge, which here carries the road from the right
to the left bank of the river; and continued its descent towards Liege.

The view, on looking back at this hardy old town, is remarkably
striking--its citadel almost by nature a fortress, independently of
engineering; and, at its foot, the antique cathedral, founded by Peter
the Hermit. The banks of the Meuse, and the Vesdre, have been prolific
in great names; Godfrey of Bouillon, the leader of the first crusade,
was born at Poisy, on the borders of Namur; Tilly, one of the great
military adventurers of the Thirty Years, came from a village still
nearer the Meuse; Hersthal, the birth-place of Pepin, “the Mayor of the
Palace,” and the founder of the kings of the second race in France,
lies a mile below Liege; and at Herve, between it and Verviers, Lebrun,
the minister of France, who died on the scaffold, in 1794, was employed
as the editor of a provincial newspaper.

The scenery, on either side of the river, improves in richness, but
loses in grandeur, as we approach Liege. The ravine through which it
rolls, between Huy and Namur, widens out into a fertile valley towards
Seraing, still enclosed, however, by precipitous cliffs, on which
castles, châteaux, and monasteries are perched, in positions that seem,
from below, at least, to be all but inaccessible. Two, in particular,
are most strikingly picturesque--the châteaux of Aigremont, between
Flaune and Engis, and another above the village of Chokier, at present
occupied by a Russian nobleman, whose visitors would certainly require
a balloon and a parachute “to drop in upon him.”

On driving round a projecting angle of the cliff, at a turn in the
course of the river, we came in view of the vast buildings and
innumerable chimneys of the great iron works at Seraing. These enormous
works are certainly one of the wonders of Belgium; and Europe, in point
of extent, possesses nothing to compare with them. Nor can one regard
this vast temple to the genius of Fulton and Watt, without emotions of
amazement, at the lightning speed with which their discoveries have
revolutionized the whole aspect of European industry, and created
wants and expedients which, half a century ago, were unfelt and
unknown; but the pressure of which, at the present day, has forced
into existence such a gigantic establishment as Seraing. Compared with
the largest manufactories in England, Seraing is as a mammoth to an
ant-hill. The quantity of actual creative power which it engenders
and pours forth, year by year, is, perhaps, equal to that of a whole
generation of artizans, in the best days of Flemish prosperity; and a
river, of ordinary current, flowing through a country of manufactures
scarcely communicates a greater impetus to the production of the
necessaries, or the comforts of life, than the steam engines which
Seraing is capable of sending forth in the compass of a single year.

The circuit of its own walls encompasses everything essential to the
completion of the most ponderous engine;--two coal mines are worked
within them--the iron ore is raised, washed, and smelted on the spot;
canals and railroads, all within its gase, convey those cumbrous
materials from process to process, from furnace to forge, till the
crude mineral which, issued from the earth in its ore, is carried from
the ware-room in the form of all but intelligent machines.

Seraing was many years in attaining its present singular development.
It was commenced in 1817, by the sons of the ingenious individual,
whom I have already mentioned as entering Verviers an impoverished
mechanic, and finally contributing, by the impulse of his single
mind, to advance the march of manufacturing improvement in Belgium
by, at least, half a century. The buildings in which, or rather,
around which its multifarious works are now congregated, was formerly
the magnificent palace of the Prince Bishops of Liege, on whose
abolition it became the property the crown. The brothers, Charles
James, and John Cockerill, whose father had already established
extensive manufactories of machinery at Liege and transmitted them to
his children, conceived the idea of transfering their industry to
Seraing, struck with its commanding advantages, the presence of coal
and iron, and its facilities of water communication in every direction,
by means of the river which flowed below its walls. To occupy all
its space, one wing was fitted up for the spinning of linen yarn,
and was so employed till 1822, when the extension of their business
in the other branches, required the rooms which it engrossed. In
1819, they commenced raising their own coal; and in 1824, they were
enabled to work iron, the produce of their own mines and furnaces.
The extraordinary encouragement given to every species of manufacture
requiring machinery, under the régime of Holland, was a source of
continued prosperity; and even the unhealthy plethora of speculation,
which has existed in Belgium since the revolution, however disastrous
to others, afforded constant employment to the workmen of Seraing, and
contributed to expand it to its present unexampled extent.

At the little village of Jemeppe, which is on the same side of the
river with the high road, we left the carriage, and crossed over in a
ferry boat to the works, over which we were obligingly conducted by
one of the superintendants. The outward edifices are all in the same
condition as when occupied by the Prince Bishop, and one wing is still
the residence of Mr. Cockerill’s family. It consists of three squares,
or courtyards, opening one into the other by noble archways, the first
of which is still surmounted by the arms of the prelate, with his
motto--“_je maintiendrai_.” The grand front contained the apartments of
the Prince himself, the second court that of his officers and suite,
and the third was appropriated for the household and stables, and now
forms, with the floors on the second story, four apartments, each two
hundred feet in length! The whole building, with its noble façade, and
the remains of fine timber which surround it, still retains an air
of magnificence suitable to its former fortune. The gardens in the
rear are now all covered over with workshops, forges, furnaces, and
store-houses; and behind these, still further retiring to the river,
are the coal fields and iron mines; the whole forming literally a
_town_ within itself, daily animated by upwards of 2,000 workmen, in
all the various branches of its comprehensive system.

Externally, except from the smoke of its chimneys at a distance, one
would scarcely discern the nature of the vast operations going on
within; but before the grand entrance on the bank of the river there
lay a huge specimen of its productions,--a gigantic cylinder, for a
steam-engine to be sent to Prussia, of two hundred and fifty horse
power, and of such dimensions, that this one limb of it alone was seven
feet in diameter, and weighed upwards of twelve tons. Besides two huge
furnaces for smelting the raw ore, there are upwards of thirty others
for the washing, puddling, and treatment of the iron in its various
stages; eighty forges, two iron founderies, and one of copper; one vast
hall for the construction of boilers, another for fly-wheels, and all
the portions of steam-engines, and a third for locomotives; besides
innumerable apartments for every other species of heavy machinery,
rooms for designers and magazines of models. (The spinning, and other
light machinery, is manufactured at another establishment at Liege.)
The whole is set in motion by seventeen steam-engines, whose united
power exceeds nine hundred horses, and the consumption of coals
for these and the furnaces is four hundred tons a day, the cost of
raising which, we were told, was fifteen francs a ton. Its productions
comprehend the whole range of English machinery for every department of
industry, and its produce is exported to every manufacturing country
to which it has a commodious communication--to Russia, to Prussia,
to Germany, Spain, Italy and France and even to South America. Every
new invention which succeeds in Great Britain has been re-produced at
Seraing, within a short time of its appearance with us.

The rooms and vast halls, from the ample construction of the building,
present an appearance quite startling to a stranger, who may not be
prepared for the unusual spectacle of a single chamber fitted up with
five hundred vices along the sides, and all alive with the rush of
wheels and the din of machines of every description, in action in the
centre. The workmen are all Belgians, not a single English mechanic
being now employed. Their tools, however, were chiefly from Manchester,
and in reply to a remark, that at Ghent the Phœnix made its own; the
superintendant observed, that they had tried the experiment and found
that they could be had both cheaper and better from England. So many
as 2,800 workmen have been at one time employed at Seraing, at wages
varying from three francs a day to five or six, but would average
about four francs round, exclusive of designers, whose gains are more
considerable. The establishment has been latterly less regularly
employed, owing to a damp upon speculation in general, and the
completion of the contracts for the various railroads, and not above
2000 hands are now engaged. The whole concern is, likewise, at present
in confusion, owing to the recent death of the proprietor, which
will occasion the entire to be disposed of for the settlement of his
affairs. The extent of his speculations in every branch of industry,
and almost in every country of Europe, is almost incredible. He was
concerned in no less than fifty different mines, and factories for
spinning and weaving cotton, woollens, and linen, for the manufacture
of paper and printed calicoes, for grinding flour, making carding
machines, and in short, every promising branch of industry in Belgium,
France, and Germany. His property at Seraing has been estimated (I
cannot answer for how correctly) at 10,000,000[13] of francs, and his
factory for spinning machinery at Liege 3,000,000, his paper mills
and buildings at Andennes 2,900,000, his flour mills at Cottbus, in
Silesia, 500,000, his woollen factory at St. Denis 500,000, his card
machinery at Spa 400,000, and his shares in various other manufactories
in Belgium and elsewhere 25,000,000. In Belgium, in fact, there has
been a mania for joint-stock speculation, scarcely equalled by the
bubbles of 1825 in Great Britain, and attended with equally ruinous
results. Mr. Cockerill’s encouragement and participation in these
adventures to such an extent, is one source of the activity and
astonishing development of Seraing; the funds of these adventurers and
his own, along with the rest, being vested in the purchase of machinery
manufactured by himself. In the event of their success, the speculation
might have been a wise one, but followed as they have been in most
instances by disappointment, the result to the proprietor of Seraing,
at least, can have been little more than keeping his forges employed
out of his own capital.

Still whoever may have been the individual sufferer, Seraing is a
stupendous example of enterprize and skill, and if placed upon a
suitable financial basis, with its singular facilities of fuel and
iron, cannot fail, under almost any circumstances, to be a vigorous
concern. The quality of its iron is excellent: this ore yields from
twenty-five to seventy-five, and some veins so much as eighty-five per
cent.; though that of Belgium in general does not exceed thirty per
cent.; and except for some very fine purposes. Seraing is perfectly
independent of any importation beyond its own walls. For copper and
brass it is, however, dependent upon England and Sweden, none whatever
being produced in Belgium, so far as I could learn. One invaluable
benefit it has already rendered to Belgium, it has served as a vast
college for the education of mechanics; and in the course of twenty
years, it has produced thousands of artizans who have branched off
into the other provinces, and formed the rival establishments of
Ghent, Brussels, Charleroi, Mons, Namur and Tournai. “The Belgians,”
says M. Briavionne, “have a natural taste for mechanics, and combine
the two essentials to success--perseverance and enterprize. But
these qualities would never have been called into action, nor their
own resources developed had England, from the first, permitted the
free export of her machinery, or Belgium imposed any restrictions
upon its import.”[14] The importations of machinery from England,
notwithstanding native enterprize have been very considerable more
especially of those half-animated engines know by the inappropriate,
and ill-understood term of “tools,” which seem to be the very life and
sustenance of the rival manufacture of Belgium. In 1830, the Belgian
official returns exhibit an import to the value of only 46,372fr., in
1835 it had risen to 464,377fr., in 1836 to 3,291,275fr., in 1837 it
was 2,851,451fr., and in 1838, 4,708,237fr.

From Seraing to Liege, a distance of three or four miles, the drive is
exceedingly beautiful, the valley of the Meuse here expands into broad
and luxuriant meadows, and the steep cliffs which accompanied us from
Namur, lean back into rich and verdant hills whose summits are covered
with timber, and their base studded with white and cheerful villas. In
the midst of this picturesque scenery, the old town of Liege bursts
upon us at a sudden turn of the road, built at the foot of the steep
hill of St. Walberg which is covered with its churches and palaces, and
spreading down to the Meuse which sweeps round its base to meet the
waters of the Ourthe and the Vesdre which unite within it.

Liege is certainly the least interesting of all the great towns of
the Netherlands, not that the events of its ancient times are less
stirring, but the character of their prominent actions is less engaging
and their quarrels less chivalrous; in its modern state, it possesses
scarcely a single attractive remnant of antiquity--no paintings, no
statues, no architectural beauties or remains. Its streets are narrow,
irregular and dirty, and the houses devoid of any thing venerable or
characteristic. Still the old chronicles of Monstrelet and Philip de
Comines, and the quaint tradition of the “wild boar of Ardennes” and
the feuds of the Dukes of Brabant and Burgundy, with the insolent
burghers, and the alternate ascendancies and indignities of the Prince
Bishops, and the rude and savage deeds of the inhuman Louis XI, are all
full of historic interest, though of a repulsive and painful kind.

Liege had been the See of a Bishop for fourteen hundred years, when
the annexation of Belgium to France put a close to the dynasty of
its sovereign prelates. Its rank was such amongst ecclesiastical
cities, that it was visited by the Popes and the Emperors; and its
citizens intoxicated, at once, with affluence and arrogance became
the most turbulent and insubordinate faction that ever “strangled
the prosperity” of a community. M. Ferrier in an historical résumé,
prefixed to his “Description de Liège,” thus sums up the condition
of the burghers in the 12th century. “The morals and manners of the
citizens became corrupted, at once, by the acquisition of extraordinary
wealth, and the extortion of inordinate privileges from the Prince
Bishops who were their ecclesiastical sovereigns. The artisans
accustomed to extravagant gains, gave but a portion of their time to
industry, and devoted the rest to the discussion of affairs of state,
in the places of public resort. The Prelate Albert de Cuyck, unable
to subdue their murmuring and disquieted spirit, retreated behind
concession after concession, till in 1198, he confirmed to them a
Charter, which invested the men of Liege with privileges such as were
unheard of in the age in which they lived. But these concessions so far
from tranquillizing, seemed but to excite them to fresh demands--the
more ample the favours yielded, the more exorbitant became their
further requirements--till in the end, their restless ambition
embroiled the city in contests of blood such as have tinged the page
of their history from century to century. The clergy, at first, made
common cause with the people against the power of the _haute noblesse_,
who enjoyed at once all military and magisterial authority in the
state; till the multitude disturbed from the pursuits of peaceful
industry, became, at length, the sport of ungovernable impulses,
sometimes generous in their origin, but which were too often degraded
into brutalized ferocity for the mere gratification of revenge. The
nobles were the first sacrifice to the popular demands, and the clergy
who succeeded to their power, became in turn their fellow victims.” The
whole story of their contests is, in fact, one succession of revolts,
not for the redress of wrongs or the assertion of liberty, but for the
lust of licentious and uncontrolled democracy. Occasionally, too, in
the long succession of its Prince Bishops, there occurred some whose
authority, instead of being exerted to control, was but employed to
exasperate the fury of the populace, and to such an air of arrogance
did some of these kingly prelates assume, that one of them, John Louis
d’Elderen, presumed, single-handed, to declare war against Louis XIV in
1686! who rewarded his temerity by directing Marshal Boufflers to beat
down the fortification of Liege about his ears, an instruction which he
duly attended to.

In later times, Liege was a fief of the empire, and the Prince Bishop,
the elector, had a vote as representing a portion of the circle of
Westphalia. In 1830, its inhabitants, with a true hereditary taste
for turmoil, were the first to take up arms on the intelligence of
the revolution, and a band of patriots, mustered and marshalled by M.
Rogier, marched from Liege to Brussels to aid in expelling the house of
Nassau, but with the intention of merely transfering the kingdom from
that dynasty to France, a project which was overruled by the clergy and
the northern insurgents. With that frightful impulse which in popular,
not less than individual frenzy, drives its victims into the violence
of hatred of all that they ought to cherish, and has sometimes forced
maniacs to eat their own flesh;--the first fury of the patriots was
directed against the manufacturing establishments, whence they drew
their bread; and nothing but the firm affection of the workmen at
Seraing to their master, and the resolution to protect his property,
saved that magnificent temple of industry from being itself committed
to the flames, by the worshippers of the rival goddess of liberty.

With less of elegance and attraction, there is an equal air of
business-like energy and bustling activity in the streets of Liege,
as at Ghent. The Meuse is navigable from the city to the sea, and
its quays are frequented by the craft, which convey its produce to
the various cities along its course, Ruremonde and Venloo to Gorcum,
Dordrecht and the Rhine. Its streets are crowded with an incessant
stream of waggons, carriages and carts, and in the better streets
and squares, the shops are as gay and attractive as those of the Rue
Montagne de la Cour at Brussels.

Coupled with its ancient fiery and quarrelsome disposition, its
chief manufacture is a characteristic one, being that of cannon and
fire-arms, which it at one time, exported to Spain, Portugal, Holland
and America. Under France, the imperial factory of arms furnished
annually, twenty-seven thousand muskets for the imperial army. A story
is told that the rest of the trade, anxious to share in the profits
of the monopoly, besought Napoleon to admit them to a share of the
supply, and presented him with a finely-finished piece as a specimen of
their talents. But as, either by accident or malice, the bore of the
barrell was too narrow to admit the ramrod, the Emperor gave no other
answer than a frown to their ill-supported petition. Under Holland in
1829, the production of Liege amounted to no less than 190,660 stand
of arms; in 1836, it rose to nearly double that quantity, but it is
at present, fallen much _below one half_, and the trade is still in a
state of decline. The manufacture is carried on at the homes of the
workmen, who, nevertheless, established a perfect division of labour in
producing the various parts, and can furnish the entire at a lower rate
than either Birmingham or France, a double-barrelled gun can be had
for thirty or even twenty francs. The percussion lock has not yet been
substituted in the Belgian army for the flint. The cannon foundery
is calculated to produce 300 pieces a year; and in 1837, the most
flourishing period of the trade, it even exceeded that number.

There is a flax-spinning mill at Liege with 10,000 spindles, the
property of a joint-stock company, of whom Mr. Cockerill was the chief
proprietor. Its works are now languid, owing to a want of consumption,
and a gentleman acquainted with its affairs, spoke very despondingly of
its prospects. Coals, though found in the immediate neighbourhood, are
dear, as they lie deep, and we saw them generally mixed into balls with
clay for the use of the stoves in the hotels and private houses, an
indication that their price is a stimulant to economy.

As might be anticipated from its having so long been the residence
of the most eminent prelate in the Low Countries, Liege abounds in
churches, there being some eighteen or twenty for a population of
50,000 inhabitants. They are, however, destitute of all attractions,
except that of St. Jacques, which is a very excellent example of
florid got his architecture. The others are common-place structures,
devoid of all valuable decorations of any kind, except a few
indifferent statues by Delcour the sculptor, who was himself a native
of the city. The Palais de Justice was formerly the residence of the
Prince Bishops, and in its ample arcades, supported by truncated
columns, exhibits traces of its former magnificence. The University,
which has some eminent professors, especially of natural philosophy,
was another foundation of the King of Holland, and besides a library of
some seventy or eighty thousand volumes, contains Museums of Natural
History, and Minerals of unusual value. But every thing connected with
modern Liege is common-place and uninteresting; its only charm is its
exquisite situation at the juncture of the three beautiful valleys
of the Meuse, the Ourthe and the Vesdre, and a very brief sojourn is
sufficient to satisfy the stranger in pursuit of “fresh fields and
pastures new.”

       *       *       *       *       *

We left Liege before breakfast for Verviers through the exquisite
valley of the Vesdre, which, as it is narrower and more tortuous than
the descent of the Meuse, excels it in picturesque beauty, though
inferior in the grandeur of its general effect. The entire line of the
road was through richly wooded glens and ravines, where the river had
forced a passage between the fantastic cliffs which time had wrought
into shapes like fortresses or the battlements of ruined strongholds.
Below, the Vesdre itself, too shallow to be navigated, twists round
each sweep of the winding cliffs, now shining in the sunlight, and
again scarcely visible under the dark shadows of the trees and rocks.
The lover of the picturesque will shudder to be told, that it is
through this charming valley that the railroad is to be carried to
connect Liege with Verviers on its way to Cologne, and even now the
engineers are at work levelling, blasting, and uprooting to make way
for it, cutting off a projecting cliff here, and filling up a useless
ravine there, and flinging lofty embankments across the entrance of
the sweetest recesses of the valley, into which you are only admitted
to have a peep through the archway on which the train is to traverse
the highway.

About four miles from Liege, in one of the glens of this beautiful
river, is Chaudefontaine, a spring which has long been the holiday
resort of the Liegois, and has now grown into a miniature watering
place, with its hotels and other agrémens. And half way to Verviers,
a road striking in between the hills on the right leads to Spa, one
of the superannuated favourites of fashion, which has long since
yielded the throne to younger and gayer rivals. The crowd now rolls
past the turn in the road which leads to it, eager to reach Carlsbad
or Wisbaden, and no longer contented, as in the Sir Charles Grandison
age, to pace the “_Promenades de quatre heures_,” walk minuets in the
“_Vauxhall_,” or make stately excursions to the cottages of Marmontel’s
Annette and Lubin. Still the country and scenery around it, and the
magnificent mountains and woods of the Ardennes yield, in nothing, to
the attractions of the later protegées of _ton_, but along with the
rest of the ungrateful crowd, we too declined the open door of the
antiquated and neglected beauty, and kept on the road to Verviers.

Verviers is a long straggling, but by no means ordinary town,
stretching along the banks of the Vesdre, whenever the command of the
stream presented a desirable site for a factory. In this, nearly 20,000
inhabitants and their machinery are located along the stream, and
the uplands forming, certainly, one of the most cheerful and healthy
manufacturing communities in Europe. The grand staples, are wool in
all its varieties of worsted and cloth, in the production of which
the valley has long enjoyed a high reputation in Holland and France,
and its goods are still exported to Italy and the Levant. Like the
people of Liege, the workmen of Verviers caught the infection of the
revolutionary mania in 1830, but their madness exhibited itself in a
still more savage form. On the first intelligence of the revolt, they
sprung, eager for the fray, and at once manifested their wishes, by
hoisting the tri-colour of France, with whom they demanded an instant
incorporation. The town has neither fortress nor garrison, and for
two days it was the scene of the most disgusting and uncontrolled
excesses. The people assembled in tumultuous masses, and with shouts
of “liberty,” tore down the royal insignia of the Netherlands, and
razed to the ground the houses of the government officers; factories
were destroyed, machinery demolished, and the whole property of the
flourishing valley seemed destined to destruction from the freaks of
this drunken revolution. At length the soberer citizens, forming an
urban guard and a council of safety, succeeded in restoring order, and
securing their property from the fingers of the children of “Freedom.”

The woollen trade of the Andennes, is one of the oldest national
occupations of the Netherlands, and for the share of it which we
enjoy in England, we are indebted to the fanatical fury of Philip II.,
whose persecutions drove the weavers of Brabant and Flanders to seek
an asylum with Elizabeth in England. Unlike its other great staple
of linen, however, Belgium, in her woollen manufacture, is dependant
upon others for the raw material which she employs; the entire of her
possessions do not feed beyond a single million of sheep, and her
annual imports of wool from Germany, Holland, England and Spain, exceed
15,000,000 francs. The two grand seats of the trade, though distributed
over a considerable district of the south, are at Verviers and Dison,
which each produce annually from 30 to 35,000 pieces of thirty ells of
Brabant in length. The manufacture is chiefly carried on in the houses
of the workmen, and in some places, especially at Dison, the employers
are so deficient in capital, that the truck system is universal,
and the weaver paid by a portion of his own produce, which he must
afterwards sell under the pressure for bread, at such a price as he
can get for it; an act of injustice to the operative, which must always
tend to the manifest injury of prices, and undermining of the trade.

Down to 1814, the trade was in every way prosperous, but the successive
curtailments of consumption, first by the exclusion from France, and,
finally, by separation from Holland, have shaken its stability, and
brought it into a state of considerable peril at the present moment.
Still the number of factories have not diminished, although the rate
of profits has been cut down to the lowest possible figure, especially
at Verviers. It gives employment, at present, to between 15,000 and
20,000 individuals of all ages, whose wages vary from half a franc per
day for children, to two francs, and two francs and a half for their
fathers. The countries to which Belgium still exports are Switzerland,
Germany, Italy, the Levant, and Holland; but a commercial treaty
between the latter country and France, is said to have been framed with
a view to transfer to French cloth, the preference now given to that
of Verviers in the Dutch market. Her exportations, however, exhibit an
incredible decline since the revolution. In 1831, its value amounted
to _twenty-seven_ millions of francs; in 1832 to _twenty-three_; in
1833, it fell to one half, and in 1836, declined to _six millions
and a half_, a diminution which is ascribable to numerous causes,
but chiefly to its exclusion from Germany, by the operation of the
Prussian commercial league; the states of which were once, previously,
its most valuable consumers. Germany, in 1831 and 1832, took no less
than 1,000,000 kilogrammes of Belgian cloth, which fell, in 1833, to
344,000, and on an average of the four succeeding years, has scarcely
exceeded 250,000.

It is not difficult to imagine the vicissitudes of the woollen trade of
Belgium, thus driven, within five-and-twenty years, from the markets
of France and her colonies, Holland, Java, and Germany, and, shut
up within the narrow circle of her new independence, to maintain a
competition with her two powerful rivals--the English and the French.
Its present condition and prospects are thus noticed in the intelligent
volume of M. Briavionne. “After having participated, for so many years,
in the splendour of the Empire, the woollen manufactures of Belgium
underwent a decline in the early stage of her connexion with Holland,
which she ultimately recovered, and with such a firm success, that
the events of 1830 inflicted on it but a momentary injury. The close
of 1831, and the years 1832, 1833 and 1834, were, on the whole, a
period of satisfactory trade. But now commenced a struggle of every
description, and the clothing for the army being speedily accomplished,
it became essential to look for new outlets abroad. But just at this
crisis came the consolidation of the Zoll-Verein in Germany--the
plague, which ravaged the Levant--the cholera, which terrified
Italy--and, above all, the commercial calamities of the United States
in 1836 and 1837, each and all of which interfered directly with her
demand; and, to crown all, a period of depression in the home market
in 1838, and last year arrived, simultaneously with a change in public
taste, as to the fashion of dress, which altered the whole character
of their productions, and imposed the expense of new machinery, and
differently constructed apparatus of all kinds. The general result is,
at present, a weighty depression, especially in the poorer districts of
Dison; and one may sum up the recent history of the trade by saying,
that the two first years after the separation from Holland were
_good_--1834, _disastrous_--1835 and 1836, _passable_--1837 and 1838,
_bad_--and 1839, equally so.”[15]

Verviers is an open, gay looking country town, not like the
manufacturing places of England, which are dense, red-bricked rows of
smoky houses, thickly huddled together--but with broad, sunny streets,
and handsome white houses; the dwellings of the proprietors and their
factories, being equally ornamented on the front next the street. The
country around it, though beautiful, is barren, and provisions of all
kinds are as expensive in Verviers as in Brussels.

M. Gaudry, an intelligent proprietor of several manufactories, to whom
we brought letters, gave a deplorable account of the recent joint stock
speculations in Belgium, which seem to have been carried on to an
extent of capital, and with a recklessness in management that is quite
inconceivable. Verviers was a favourite field for their operations,
owing to the variety of its resources, which presented something to
suit every appetite of enterprise; and as works in actual operation
were much more seductive baits for shareholders, concerns were bought
up wholesale from their proprietors at the most extravagant rates, to
be sold out again in retail shares to the joint stock amateurs. One
coal mine, in the vicinity of the town, which had nearly ruined its
proprietor, was greedily purchased by the projectors of one of these
schemes, making its owner’s fortune just in time to conceal his actual
ruin, and after being worked for a short time, ended in the bankruptcy
of the new company--but, of course, not till it had amply rewarded
the secretaries, solicitors, and directory. A worsted manufacturer, in
like manner, who was on the verge of insolvency, offered his mills to a
joint stock proprietary, who eagerly accepted them on his terms--paid
a sum for the concern, which he forthwith invested in land, and gave
him a salary, for managing his own works, more than equal to all the
profits they ever realized.

It will scarcely be believed, though it is a fact, that between 1833
and 1838, one hundred and fifty or sixty companies of this kind,
actually invested three hundred and fifty millions of francs, or about
£15,000,000, in speculations of this kind--for insurances, mines,
machine making, public works, export associations, glass manufactories,
sugar refineries, cotton and flax mills, printing, brewing, in short,
every imaginable undertaking that could be described in scrip.

The mania originated with some similar undertakings projected by
the King of Holland, but which being prudently conducted were
moderately successful. But never was theory more vividly exemplified,
in practice, than were the warnings of Adam Smith realized in the
case of the Belgium companies; without either of his two essentials
to success--“monopoly or defined and limited action;” they burst at
once into all the pathless wilds of speculation and extravagance. To
success in any industrial undertaking, two things are essential, _mind
and money_; but the shareholders of a company contribute only the
latter, leaving the supply of the former to a directory: the partners
are only called upon to _pay_ and not to _think_, so that the mass of
their capital is unrepresented by an equivalent proportion of intellect
and forethought. The _general_ result of this, is the failure that
invariably accompanies neglect, and even the works which are undertaken
are never pushed with vigour, or expanded by new discoveries and
inventions. These are the offspring of that anxious exertion of all
the faculties of the brain which accompanies the watchful prudence of
a man, who has his whole fortune at stake, and is dependent upon his
individual genius. But the holder of a joint-stock share, who throws
his contribution into the general fund, and sends twice a year for his
dividend, (perhaps, without receiving it,) has neither the information
nor the interest that are indispensable to stimulate improvements.

Mistakes and errors are thus constantly occurring, and losses
supervene; these, on their first appearance, would alarm and deter a
private individual from incurring further risk, and he would prepare,
at once, to retrieve his capital; but to the officers of a company
these occurrences are matters of comparative indifference, so long as
the last shilling of the paid up funds remains to meet their salaries
as they fall due. And even the proprietary themselves, though conscious
of the diminution of their profits, do not feel it so acutely, coming
as it does off so large a fund, and are, besides, spurred on by the
spirit of rivalry to incur the temporary loss, in order to drive some
competing company from the field, which is only to be done by the
largeness of their transactions; on the principle of the match-seller,
who lost a trifle upon every bundle, and would be ruined were it not
for the vast extent of the business which he did.

The results of this system were not slow in developing themselves in
Belgium; one by one they began to strain, break, and give way; distrust
was every hour growing blacker, when the bank of Belgium, which had
been similarly formed in 1835, with a capital of twenty millions of
francs, and had encouraged the establishment of some twenty or thirty
other joint-stock speculations, with a capital of fifty millions more,
suddenly suspended payment in 1838, and universal dismay and confusion
followed; bubbles burst in all directions, those concerns which were
unsound exploded at once, and others more substantial suspended their
operations, and resorted to fresh calls and loans to enable them to
proceed. In the mean time, prices and the wages of labour had been
fluctuating like the waves of the sea under this financial tempest,
at one time raised to the highest pitch by the demand for machinery
created by such vast simultaneous exertions, and anon reduced below
a remunerative level by the ardour of their competition with each
other. Several of these companies still survive, but almost universally
struggling with the difficulties in which they have involved not only
themselves, but those private individuals whose steady and lucrative
trade they had invaded in the rage of their speculations.

From Verviers to Eupen, the Prussian frontier, the road is high and
uninteresting; it speedily leaves the charming valleys of the Vesdre
behind, and comes within sight of the ruins of Limbourg, one of the
most melancholy scenes of desolation I have seen--it stands lonely
and apart upon the summit of a rocky eminence, the remains of what
had once been a city, now a wilderness. Its rugged walls covered with
green moss, scarcely a roof visible, and the remnants of its shattered
fortifications flung, like a torn banner, across the sky. It has still,
however, a few wretched inhabitants, who are engaged in the zinc mines
in its vicinity. It seems incredible that this stranded wreck, was
once the capital of a duchy and the residence of a sovereign.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is impossible to turn one’s back upon this most interesting and
enterprising country without emotions of deep anxiety as to its
future destiny. Its political fortunes would require something more
than ordinary foresight to predict, and the recent possibility of an
European war, elicited the avowal of how slightly France would regard
the treaties of 1831 or 1839, did Belgium stand for one moment in the
way to obstruct her designs, either of aggression or defence. But those
for whose future lot the strongest sympathy is excited, are her skilful
artisans and her energetic and adventurous manufacturers and merchants.
Merchants, indeed, she has but few, for nature and providence seem to
have combined to render Belgium a workshop rather than a warehouse.
Austria, by the base desertion of her shipping interest, in becoming
a party to the closing of the Scheldt at the treaty of Munster,
compelled her to turn her attention inwardly upon herself, and to seek
to replace by the loom and the hammer, that which she had lost by the
annihilation of the sail and the helm. Under France, and with the
all-powerful protection of Napoleon, her capabilities were developed to
the fullest extent of her capital and her means, all Europe affording
a market for her commodities, and creating a demand almost beyond her
power to supply.

With the events of 1815, and her annexation to Holland, that vast
outlet was contracted to a narrower space, and the King, on assuming
the direction of his affairs, found a nation of mechanics, whom it
became his province to provide with profitable employment. In the
attempt to do this, it is questionable whether he did not overstep the
bounds of prudence, and lead, by the system he adopted, to the further
development of powers which were already simply sufficient for their
functions;

    As worldlings do, giving the sum of more
    To that which had too much--

Individual enterprise was superseded rather than assisted; and the
expedients of the government tended to injure it in one respect by
relieving it from the effects of its own errors, feeding it with
capital, and carrying off its surplus production through societies
which purchased at a handsome price to export at a loss. Even with
all these appliances, her resources and powers were developed beyond
the legitimate means of their employment, and the 15,000,000 of her
population and colonies, whom Holland, compelled to give a preference
to her productions, were inadequate to their consumption. What then
must have been her condition, when in 1830, those 15,000,000 were
reduced to something more than three, whilst her machinery and powers
of production remained the same as before?

The new government, it must be admitted upon all hands, in spite of
the murmurs of those, the evils of whose condition lay too deep for
superficial remedies, such as the ministry had it in their power to
apply, have left no practical expedient untried to afford them relief,
but as yet in vain; and the history of one year seems but to afford a
painful contrast with the greater prosperity of that which preceded
it. Money, so far as it was available, has in no case been spared.
Mechanical and commercial education, both theoretical and practical,
has been duly attended to; prizes and honours have been awarded to
successful industry; and communications, both by highways, railroads,
and canals, have been lavishly provided to invite consumption and
demand; but no government can possibly afford the Belgians or procure
for them, that which alone can be a fundamental remedy--_a market
proportionate to their machinery_.

In every thing that is the offspring of manual labour brought to bear
upon native produce, their manufactures are successful; but so soon as
they are either obliged to bring their raw material from abroad, or to
come into competition with the machinery of more populous countries,
their advantages suddenly disappear. Thus in iron work in general,
cutlery, ordinary machinery, and hardware, they excel; as well as in
the production of lace and of linen yarn, in distillation or brewing,
in the manufacture of furniture and paper, and, in short, in all the
indispensable requisites of a home consumption. On the other hand,
their coal and their iron, though abundant, lie deeper and dearer than
those of their most formidable rivals in Great Britain; and copper,
which is equally essential to extensive operations in machinery, they
have none. Their trade would lose its pre-eminence could the Irish be
once induced to adopt their processes for the preparation of flax;
their cotton manufacture is in the agonies of dissolution, and their
silk has already departed. Their woollens, their sugar refiners, and
other once fruitful fields of enterprise and wealth, are no longer to
be relied on; and, in a word, the whole frame-work of their system is
labouring under a plethora, for which no ingenuity has yet sufficed to
invent an effectual relief.

One expedient, may, perhaps, suggest itself, that if her manufacturing
force is too great, it should be directed into other channels, and
her powers of production reduced into an accordance with her demand
and consumption. But, independently of the fact, that her agriculture,
which lost, equally with her artizans, an outlet in the colonies of
Holland, is already overstocked, and would afford no reception to her
surplus mechanics, the production of her machinery, even if reduced
within the wants of a population of three or four millions, would
still be undersold by those of her rivals, whose consumption extends
over a vastly more extended field. England with two hundred millions
of subjects in India and the West; Russia with 66,000,000; Austria
with half that number; the German League with twenty-four, and France
with thirty-five millions, would render it utterly beyond the power of
Belgium to enter any neutral market in the world in competition with
them, or even to supply her own, unless at a sacrifice.

The character of the Belgians for industry, frugality, and skill,
is not surpassed by that of any artisan in the world, but these,
unfortunately, are not the only requisites to success. “The sufferings
of the Belgian mechanics,” says M. Briavionne, “are all referable to
their unfortunate political position; but, formed in a school of long
adversity, they have learned to discover, even in their misfortunes, a
fountain of higher qualities, which has sustained them in their painful
struggle. Prodigal in prosperity, adversity has served to teach them
economy--to render them systematic, patient, and persevering. Nurtured
in luxury, they have become reconciled to privations; and the Belgian
manufacturer has long since learned to place his sole reliance upon
untiring labour, and unyielding industry. Less adventurous than the
American, or the Englishman, he has more fore-sight, moderation and
patience, than them both.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_“The condition of the population,” adds M. Briavionne, “may be thus
summarily described;--of four millions of inhabitants, one is in
independence, (l’aisance), another in want, (besoin), and the remainder
floating between these two points.”_

But another reflection naturally forces itself upon the mind of any one
who sympathises with the artisans of Belgium, generous, industrious,
and deserving, as they have here been described--_who and what is it
that have reduced them to this condition of suffering and privation?_
The answer is but too obvious; and those who were the base instruments
of their ruin, if they have not discovered the effects of their own
crime, in the stagnation of all national prosperity, must, long ere
this, have learned it in the “curses, not loud but deep,” with which
their actions are assailed, by their dupes and victims. Belgium has,
years ere this, discovered the truth of the maxim, that it is--

          “--better to bear the ills we have,
    Than fly to others we know not of.”

If, under the successive sovereignties of Austria and France, and as
an integral portion of that of Holland, she had not the poetical
satisfaction of being “a nation instead of a province,” she had, at
least, the substantial enjoyments of liberty, wealth and remunerative
industry, blessings which even “hereditary bondsmen” might hesitate to
exchange for bigotry, poverty and decay.




CHAPTER V.

AIX-LA-CHAPELLE.

    Change in the aspect of the country in crossing the frontier from
      Belgium into Prussia--Passports no real inconvenience--Anecdote
      of a Jamaica planter--First view of AIX-LA-CHAPELLE--Its
      population and employments--_Insurrection of the patriots in
      1830_--Its absurd termination--The Cathedral of Charlemagne--Its
      architecture--Donation of Mary, Queen of Scots--THE TOMB
      OF CHARLEMAGNE--His singular mode of interment--The relics
      in the treasury--The Redoute--Gaming discountenanced in
      Prussia--_The Hotel de Ville_--Statue and fountain of
      Charlemagne--Environs of Aix agreeable--Political condition
      of the Trans-Rhenan provinces of Prussia--_Excellent posting
      arrangements_--Improvement suggested in England--Aspect of the
      country to Juliers--JULIERS--_Neuss_--Trade in crushing oil
      might be advantageously introduced in Ireland--The church of St.
      Quirinus--The Rhine.


WITHOUT any material change in the general aspect of the country, a
hundred little incidental matters quickly apprize the stranger who has
crossed the Belgian frontier, that he has passed into Prussia. The
jolting of the pavé is changed, in an instant, for the smooth roll of
macadamization: instantaneously, instead of the French he has been
accustomed to, he is saluted in German by the douaniers: every stake
and wooden bar about the custom-house is accurately ring-streaked, like
a barber’s pole, only with white and black instead of crimson--and
the lumbering post boy of Belgium, with a half Hibernian license of
costume, is replaced by the trim postilion, in his military uniform,
and trumpet slung across his shoulder, with a profusion of worsted lace
and tassels. The aspect of the country, too, is different, and the
broad, French-like, sweeps of hill and valley, which extend through
Limbourg, became broken up into wide inclosures, diversified with
abundance of woods and luxuriant plantings.

Neither the douaniers, nor the police, gave us the slightest
inconvenience; the former, and without any fee, accepted our assurance
that our carriage contained nothing contraband, and did not open a
single box; the latter _visé’d_ our Belgian passports without delay,
and within ten minutes from passing under the barrier, we found
ourselves rolling quickly, over an excellent road, to Aix-la-Chapelle.
The barrier itself, by the way, is a change from the Belgian;--a
ponderous beam of wood, painted, as usual, in circular stripes of
white and black, rests right across the road, and being loaded with a
heavy weight at one end, is allowed to rise upon a pivot, to allow the
traveller to drive under.

Throughout, not only Prussia, but Germany in general, we found the
same polite facilities regarding passports, at every frontier and
police station at which it was necessary to present them; and although
they were, of course, required to be formal, we had neither delay nor
annoyance in their investigation. In fact, I am satisfied, from my
own experience, that nine-tenths of the outcry against the “tyrannous
nuisance of passports,” on the continent, arises from the irregularity
of those who carry them, in complying with the stated requirements,
or their absurd impatience of a custom, in which, though it is applied
indiscriminately to all the world, their self-importance suspects
something personal to themselves. An English gentleman from the West
Indies, who was travelling some years ago in Switzerland, attended by a
faithful negro slave was feelingly assured by him, when fuming at some
annoyance of the passport system in the successive cantons, “that it
was quite evident they would find no real liberty till they returned to
Jamaica.”

On gaining the summit of a long hill, we suddenly looked down
upon the turrets and domes of the venerable and imperial city of
Charlemagne, in the basin of a deep woody amphitheatre, which rises
around it on all sides, covered with waving forests to the very top.
No situation could be imagined more charming without anything very
picturesque or magnificent. The suburbs extend a long way beyond the
old fortifications, and after driving past innumerable villas and
pleasant cottages, we passed under a massy square gate surmounted by
a high slated roof, and rattled along a coarse lumpy pavement through
streets of dirty and desolate houses, with little appearance of either
wealth, comfort, or prosperity, on any side. The most striking edifices
are the huge hotels, which seem still to enjoy a pretty fair share of
patronage, though Aix, like Spa, has of late years been postponed for
the baths of Bohemia and the Rhine, and the majority of the travellers
whom we meet in the streets are only on the wing, hastening to or
returning from a visit to its more distant rivals.

Under the German empire, Aix-la-Chapelle possessed sufficient resources
within itself, to enable it to support the dignity of a free imperial
city. Its woollen manufactures were long famous in Europe, and the
manufacture of cloth is still one of its most lucrative employments.
Coals are abundant in its vicinity, and it has likewise an extensive
trade in the construction of machinery, which was introduced here by
one of the ubiquitous Cockerills of Seraing. He experienced, however,
in 1830, an ungenerous return for all his enterprise, his house and
premises being one day sacked and plundered by a band of mutinous
rioters. The population of Aix-la-Chapelle are eminently Catholic,
and its working population swelled by perpetual emigrations from
Verviers and Liege, were inspired with the utmost sympathy for the
proceedings of the patriots of the Belgian revolution. Their character,
however, was of the worst description, and a love of plunder contended
with a love of country in the composition of their patriotism. The
intelligence of the three days of July at Paris, had warmed this
double enthusiasm to a dangerous glow, but when upon this revolution
supervened the three days of September at Brussels, their generous
ardour in the cause of liberty was no longer to be restrained within
common bounds; and, at length, one evening, on the arrival of the
diligence from Liege with tricolor cockades on the horses’ heads, the
latent fires of freedom burst forth; even the strong walls of the
prison could not restrain the patriotic ardour of its inmates, who
being enlarged by their generous countrymen immediately shared with
them the benefits of their previous observations, and leading them
to the most promising spots for helping themselves, they proceeded
amidst animating cries of “_Vive les Belges!_” and “_Vive la liberté!_”
to divide the furniture and dispose of the stocks in trade of the
wealthier inhabitants and shopkeepers.

Mr. Cockerill being most obnoxious as a manufacturer, who gave
extensive employment to the poor, and had his mansion furnished with
a degree of intolerable elegance and comfort, was speedily taught the
incompatibility of such habits and enjoyments with the principles of
genuine liberty; and in the course of a few hours, the contents of his
residence, valued at 50,000 dollars, disappeared, and along with it
the liberators took charge of his money, consisting of 135,000 francs
in bank-notes, and 25,000 more in silver and gold. The progress of
the patriots was, however, checked by the appearance of their vulgar
enemies, the police; a hundred and twenty of whom, under the command of
a despot, named Brendamour, prevented the torch of freedom from taking
its “radiant ground,” and by a few discharges of musketry amongst the
“liberators,”

    Repress’d their noble rage,
    And froze the genial current of their souls.

Some forty or fifty “lofty spirits” were disenthralled by this volley
of the burgher guards, several others were wounded and made prisoners,
but a vast number escaped across the frontiers, to unite with their
kindred hearts in Belgium; and seventy, who were tried on the insulting
imputation of robbery and incendiarism, were basely condemned by the
Prussian authorities to undergo the inglorious punishments awarded to
such offences. So ended the revolution of Aix-la-Chapelle.

Aix-la-Chapelle is still a venerable old city, especially when seen
from a distance, and its very name is connected with imperial ideas;
Charlemagne and his chivalry, Kings, Emperors and Popes, wars,
congresses and treaties, all of which have, at one time or another,
been associated with its name. But it has now few objects of great
interest within itself--its interest is with the past. Its Dom Kirke,
_the_ chapel whence the ancient city of Achen derived its appellation,
to distinguish it from others of the same name in Savoy and Provence,
like some relic from the sea encrusted with shells and parasites, is
scarcely discernible in the midst of the coatings of modern buildings
with which it is shut up and enveloped,--a confused agglomeration of
styles, Gothic, Saxon, Byzantine and Moresco. But the central dome,
the nucleus of the entire building, and that portion said to have
been originally selected to cover in the Emperor’s tomb, stand still
erect and firm, no doubt in consequence of perpetual repairs and
restorations, “a thousand years roll over it in vain,” and it exhibits,
unquestionably, the oldest specimen of Saxon architecture in the
world. It had been originally a simple domed octagon, with arched
windows in each of its sides, and surrounded within by a gallery,
sustained by pillars of porphery, from the Palace of the Exarch of
Ravenna, which were carried hither by Charlemagne. These are at least
identical--they have survived the ravage of the Normans, and all the
subsequent ravages of Germany till the French greedy

  To rive what Goth and Turk, and Time had spared,

carried them off to Paris, and as only a portion of them were ever
returned, they have not yet relieved the white-washed columns by which
they were replaced.

Other chapels have, at various times, been run out from the sides of
the ancient centre, so that the whole is now an informal and confused
mass, but without anything striking or magnificent, unless it be the
large windows of the choir built about five hundred years ago, which as
they rise from the foundation quite to the vaulted roof give it the
appearance of a gigantic conservatory. Suspended in the midst of the
choir is a crown for the Virgin, the gift of Queen Mary of Scotland,
and in various parts of the church are hung a greater profusion of
those votive models of broken limbs and infant’s marks than I have seen
elsewhere.

These offerings often accompany the prayers for the recovery of the
object represented, or are hung up in grateful commemoration of the
event--may not the singular custom be referable to the incident of
the Philistines recorded by Samuel, when in order to get rid of the
emerods and the plague of mice with which they were afflicted, they
were directed by “the priests and diviners” to make five golden emerods
and six golden mice according to the number of their cities and their
lords, and to offer them for a trespass-offering for having taken the
ark captive, “for one plague was upon them and upon their lords.”

But the most solemn object in “that ancient oratory” is the huge black
flag that closes down the tomb of Charlemagne--it lies under the centre
of the gigantic dome, beneath a huge gilded candelabrum, a gift of the
Emperor Barbarossa, designed to burn above the grave of the conqueror
which, bears the brief but sublime inscription in brazen letters
sunk in the solid stone “CAROLO MAGNO.” An extraordinary incident is
connected with this impressive sepulchre. The Emperor, Otto III, two
hundred years after the death of Charlemagne, caused the stone to be
lifted and descended into the sepulchre of the buried monarch--he
found him not prostrate in decay, but seated upon a throne of marble,
covered with bosses of gold--the crown upon his bony brow--the royal
dalmatic robe around his fleshless shoulders--his right hand resting
on the sword, which the song of the troubadours has immortalized as
the “_irrésistible Joyeuse_,” and in his left the sceptre and the
orb, the emblems of a dominion which was co-extensive with the globe
itself. The pilgrims pouch which he had borne in life as an emblem
of humility was still hanging from his girdle, and on his knees an
illuminated transcript of the gospels. The Emperor removed the regalia
to Nuremberg, whence they were afterwards transferred to Vienna, and
there in the imperial jewel chamber in the Schweitzer-Hof, are still to
be seen the royal paraphernalia of Charlemagne, the crown set with rude
uncut gems, such as may rarely be referred to a period a thousand years
ago. The body was replaced in a sarcophagus of alabaster in the tomb,
but, has long since disappeared, and the marble chair on which it was
seated, is still shown in one of the alcoves of the gallery above.

This striking incident suggested the following lines, which were given
to me by a Lady, with whose exquisite productions the public are
already familiar--Mrs. Alaric A. Watts. They have not before appeared
in type.


THE TOMB OF CHARLEMAGNE.

    Whose is this fair sarcophogus?
      A hero’s shrine, a Christian’s tomb;
    Whose sable pall, a banner waves,
      Whose canopy a minster’s dome,--
    What heart reposeth 'neath its shade
      Whose ashes thus enshrined lie?
    Ask, of the nations gathered round,
      For each can make reply!

    The sunny south hath heard his voice,
      The frigid north his face hath seen,
    The patriarch east, his foot hath trod
      The barbarous west--his own hath been,
    The common air proclaimed his name,
      Where’ere the breath of heaven hath blown,
    His sceptred galleys walked the main;
      And claimed it as their own.

    Still ask you of the silent guest,
      Who finds in death his bed below;
    Pavia,[16] hast thou the secret kept,
      Nor thou revealed it Ronceveaux?
    Brave brotherhood of Paladin’s
      Bear ye no witness of his reign?
    Ye kingly minstrels--answer us,
      Who sang of Charlemagne!

    Say hero did thy lordly will
      In death demand a monarch’s throne,
    To bear into eternity,
      What time had made thine own!
    The regal crown that prince’s wear,
    The royal robe--the well proved shield,
    The good sword of thy red right hand,
      Which only thine could wield.

    Repose brave spirit for the day,
      Of stormy strife hath long been o’er,
    Rest till the last dread trumpet bray,
      And thou awake to sleep no more.
    Time hath not seen thy kindred soul,
      Its roll of fame is still unfurled,
    Peace to thee, rock of Chrystendom,
      Whose deeds have filled the world!

Aix-la-Chapelle, as a city, is, as I have said, eminently Catholic,
and the minster is at all times crowded with devotees, and objects of
the most pitiable deformity. The “treasury” of the Cathedral too, is
surprisingly rich in relics, girdles of the virgin, the napkin in which
Herodias’ daughter received the head of John the Baptist, Aron’s rod, a
stick of the true cross, some genuine manna from the wilderness, and a
whole inventory of such other trumpery as are usually to be found in
these pious “marine stores.” Still the Dom Kirke is a most interesting
spot, for there is a sufficiency of reality about it, to connect its
present condition with the past.

Not far from the minster is one of those atrocious bagnios, the
disgrace and disgust of continental watering places, a licensed
hell--to the modified credit of Prussia, it is the _only one_ in her
dominions, and tolerated only on the humiliating representation, that
were it abolished, our countrymen and others would utterly desert the
baths of Aix-la-Chapelle, for the more distant Brunnens of Nassau and
Baden, which would still continue the dishonoring attraction. The
inhabitants themselves, however, and the officers of the garrison are
strictly forbidden to cross the threshold--a striking rebuke to the
crowds of strangers who frequent it. It seems to be a spacious building
with no external attractions, and the lower story occupied by fancy
shops and booksellers.

The Hôtel de Ville a remarkable, and now almost ruinous old building,
is said to occupy the site of the birth place of Charlemagne, and one
of the lofty towers embedded in the building is ascribed to the Romans,
whose bathing propensities found a thousand allurements in the hot
springs of this beautiful valley. The interior contains a series of
halls and saloons, in which congresses have been held, and treaties
of peace negociated at various times, during the last century and the
present, including that of 1818, when the allied armies were withdrawn
from France. Its walls, covered with frescoes and its ceilings
once richly stuccoed are now dropping into dust and decay, and the
prestige of antiquity is destroyed by converting it into the bureau
of the police, at the door of which a crowd of impatient English,
were muttering “curses not loud but deep,” upon the vexations of the
passport system.

In the little square opposite it, stands a fountain of stone,
surmounted by the bronze statue of Charlemagne, which has afforded
a model for so many of his portraits, standing in armour, crowned,
and with the orb in one hand and his renowned falchion in the other.
This work of art received as usual, the sterling mark of the French
virtuosi, by performing the pilgrimage to the Louvre. On either side of
the fountain are two pedestals each supporting a huge bronze eagle.

Aix, as a halting place for invalids, may be a sufficiently agreeable
spot for a temporary stay, the air from its situation must be mild
and healthful, and the views around it are in every way charming. The
merits and virtues of its waters, whatever they are, are of course
as salubrious now as before the revolution of fashion, and the hills
around it abound in agreeable and healthful excursions. The obelisk on
the Louisberg rising immediately above the city, which was raised by
Napoleon to commemorate his victories, was upturned by the Cossacks
in search of the coins which they understood it to be the custom to
deposit in the foundation of such erections, but was restored by the
King of Prussia, and its vaunting inscriptions obliterated. The little
village of Borcette or Burscheid, at the foot of the hill opposite
the Louisberg, and about half a mile from the city gates, is another
cockneyfied lounge of the citizens and invalids, with mathematical
flower-beds and gravel walks in right angles and parallels. At all
these places are to be found the usual pastimes, theatres, music-bands,
bazaars, cafés, dancing, and all the unmeaning _petits jeus_ of a
watering place.

Aix-la-Chapelle is the capital of the Trans-Rhenan provinces, conferred
upon Prussia at the Congress of Vienna, when they were taken out of
that symmetrical boundary, which Napoleon had taught France, to look
to as the natural frontier of her dominions. If no other consideration
weighed with the allied sovereigns in forming the kingdom of the
Netherlands, than the erection of a controlling state upon the north of
France; a glance at the map might suggest to geographical politicians
the singularity of connecting Prussia by one straggling line, with
France on the one hand and Prussia on the other, and the greater
propriety of having added these provinces to augment the importance of
the newly-erected state, to whose manufacturing interests, the boon
of an additional million and a half of consumers, would have been an
important acquisition. It is just probable that such a disposition
might have given it greater permanence, though it would have been by
establishing from the first a preponderance of the Roman Catholic
party to the prejudice of the Dutch Protestants. As it is, however,
the feelings of the people themselves, so far as my enquiries were
accurately answered, are those of perfect contentment with their
present position; and the firm but temperate resolution of the late
King, Prussia has as yet been perfectly successful in satisfying them
as to the nature of their real interests. The absurd and drunken
riots I have alluded to in 1830, and the contumacious audacity of the
Archbishop of Cologne two years back, are the only instances I have
heard of disaffection or insubordination.

We stayed during our visit to Aix-la-Chapelle at an admirable hotel, the
“Grand Monarque,” large enough to lodge a whole hospital of invalids,
whether suffering from one or other of the “maladies Anglaises,”
consumption or ennui. In the morning when we were to take our departure
for Dusseldorff, we found, after waiting an hour for the arrival of
our horses from the posting office, that the waiter over night had
neglected his instructions to order them, when a delay of nearly an
hour had to take place till our passports could be sent to the chief of
the department and the error rectified.

An admirable regulation prevails throughout the entire of Germany with
regard to posting, which might, with the best effect, be introduced in
England, and without any government interference in the affair. Before
starting, the post master, who is an officer of the crown, delivers
to the traveller a printed form signed by himself, and specifying
the items of every charge for the stage he is setting out upon, the
distance, the number of horses, the mileage, and the tolls; this, if
erroneous, is corrected on the spot, and the stranger is thus freed
from all wrangling or apprehension of imposture. The posting tariff, at
the same time, regulates the “_trinkgelt_,” the fee of the postillion,
which is but five silver groschen, or six-pence for a German mile
containing four and two-thirds English; but this the traveller is
expected, though he must not be _solicited_ to exceed, provided he is
satisfied with the performance of his post-boy, and in general double
the amount, or at the utmost three-half-pence per mile will excite a
lively gratitude.

The face of the country, between Aix-la-Chapelle and the Rhine,
without being picturesque in any degree, is proverbially rich and
luxuriant, especially the ancient Duchy of Juliers, now extinguished,
which surrounds the fortified city of the same name. Every town and
village we passed through was but a congregation of agricultural
dwellings--every building was converted into a barn--and even from the
windows of some ruinous towers, we saw the projecting sheaves of the
early harvest, which had been already gathered in.

Juliers, where we breakfasted, is a fortified city, built in the midst
of an apparently swampy level, but so begirt and encompassed with
ramparts and fosses, that it is said to be impregnable to every assault
but that of starvation. We drove over drawbridges and under covered
ways without end; the passage winding from side to side, till it seemed
to issue in the opposite direction from that at which it entered the
side of the fortification, and we halted for an excellent breakfast
at a most unpromising inn, the “Drei Königen,” in the centre of the
town, which as Juliers is the highway to Dusseldorff and Cologne, was
beset by diligences and calèches of every conceivable shape and model.
Juliers has no trade, and its sole support seems to be the regular
victualling of a garrison of 3,000 Prussians, and the almost equally
regular reception of twice as many English tourists on wing to the
Rhine, or returning from it.

Between Juliers and Neuss, on the banks of the river, we scarcely saw
an acre of pasture land or meadow, all seemed to be under cultivation,
and the wonder is, where they find fodder for their cattle, unless they
have been effectually weaned off all appreciation of grass or clover.
Neuss is a bustling, industrious little community of some four or
five thousand inhabitants, busily engaged in the manufacture of linen
and woollen cloth, and having numerous mills for an operation that I
am surprised is not attempted in Ireland, the crushing of vegetable
oils. At a time when the capture of whales is said to be becoming most
precarious, and the demand is increased beyond expectation by the
augmentation of machinery and the increase of railroads, which seem to
have more than counterbalanced the introduction of gas, it would surely
be found as lucrative in the rich soil of Ireland as that of Flanders
or the Rhine, to grow hemp and colza with a view to express the oil for
the consumption. A windmill, such as one sees thousands of in Holland
and Belgium, with all the machinery for this purpose, can be put up, I
understand, for £150, or even less.

Neuss is mentioned by Tacitus as Novesium, and Drusus is said to
have constructed a bridge across the Rhine above the town, at the
same spot where there is now a swinging bridge to convey passengers
to Dusseldorff. It has a very remarkable church, the steeple of
which serves as a pedestal for a large and spirited statue of St.
Quirinus, who with an unfurled flag in his hand, performs double duty
as its patron and weather-cock. The building itself is of some Saxon
or Norman architecture, closely resembling that of Charlemagne at
Aix-la-Chapelle, and underneath it is a singular crypt, with groined
arches, supported by low truncated columns, and having altogether an
air of the remotest antiquity.

About a mile and a half from the town, we drove upon the platform of
the swinging bridge, along with a crowd of horses, cattle and foot
passengers, and in less than five minutes were carried over by the
mere action of the rapid current to the opposite side, where a drive
of another mile or two through gardens and suburbs, brought us to the
Breitenbacher-Hof, in the central square of Dusseldorff.


THE END.




APPENDIX.




APPENDIX.


No. I.

COMPARATIVE PRICES OF MACHINERY IN BELGIUM AND IN GREAT BRITAIN.

As the question of permitting the free export of machinery from this
country, occupies at present much of the attention of the British
legislature, and its policy cannot be safely estimated without a
knowledge of the comparative rates at which the same article can be
produced on the continent and with us--in other words, what advantage
the mill-owners and manufacturers of Great Britain enjoy, at the
present moment, in the outlay for the erection of their works--I have
been at some pains to ascertain its relative value in Belgium and in
Manchester, and the following extracts, of the prices at the Phœnix
works of Ghent, is contrasted with the cost of the same articles in
England, as furnished to me by an eminent machine-maker of Manchester.

  -----------------------------------+-------------------+-------------
                                     | BELGIAN PRICES.     |ENGLISH
                                     |                     | PRICES.
                                     +--------+-----+------+-----+-----
                                     | Francs | £.  |_s._  |  £. |_s._
  COTTON MACHINERY.                  |        |     |      |     |
                                     |        |     |      |     |
  Blowing machine, new plan,         |        |     |      |     |
    36 inches wide                   |  1500  | 60  | ..   |  38 | ..
  Ditto, 2 beaters, 2 wire           |        |     |      |     |
    cylinders, 36 inches             |  3000  |120  | ..   |  72 | ..
  Lap machine, 18 to 20 inches wide  |  1375  | 55  | ..   |  55 | ..
  Lap machine and blowing machine    |        |     |      |     |
    united, 36 inches                |  4000  |160  | ..   | 120 | ..
  Fan serving for 2 or 3 beaters     |   400  | 16  | ..   |  10 | ..
  Double card, cylinders and flats in|        |     |      |     |
    mahogany                         |   685  | 27  | 10   |  26 | ..
  Patent English card by J. Smith    |  4000  |160  | ..   | 100 | ..
  Large double card, 44 inches       |        |     |      |     |
    broad                            |  4100  |164  | ..   | 100 | ..
  Grinding machine for slackening    |        |     |      |     |
    the top cards                    |   700  | 28  | ..   |  26 | ..
  Patent machine for stripping the   |        |     |      |     |
    main cylinder                    |   325  | 13  | ..   |   9 | ..
  Slivering machine                  |   850  | 34  | ..   |  24 | ..
  Drawing frame of 4 to 10 heads, 3  |        |     |      |     |
    row rollers, per head            |   195  |  7  | 16   |   6 | ..
  Slotting machine, 28 spindles      |  2025  | 81  | ..   |  67 | ..
  Roving frames of 48 spindles,      |        |     |      |     |
    driven by bands, three rows,     |        |     |      |     |
    9 rollers, double slides,        |        |     |      |     |
    expansive pulleys                |  2300  | 92  | ..   |  74 | ..
  Tube frame of J. C. Dyer, 16 to 24 |        |     |      |     |
    tubes, per tube                  |   150  |  6  | ..   |   5 | ..
  Mule jenny of 240 to 264 spindles, |        |     |      |     |
    per spindle                      |  6⅑    | ..  |5_s._ |   3 | ..
                                     |        |     |2½_d._|     |
  _Flax and Tow Machinery._          |        |     |      |     |
                                     |        |     |      |     |
  Heckling machine, complete with    |        |     |      |     |
    hackles                          |  1200  | 48  | ..   |  34 | ..
  Double cutter machine              |  1200  | 48  | ..   |  36 | ..
  Circular heckling machine, for cut |        |     |      |     |
    flax                             |  1741  | 69  | 12   |  42 | ..
                                     |        |     |      |     |
  _Preparation of Long Flax._        |        |     |      |     |
                                     |        |     |      |     |
                             | Francs| Francs |     |      |     |
                             | Chain | Spiral |Chain|Spiral|Chain|Spiral
  1st drawing or spreading   |       |        |     |      |     |
    machine                  |  1800 |  2500  | £72 |£100  |  £56| £65
  2nd drawing 2 heads, 2     |       |        |     |      |     |
    slivers each, per head   |  1000 |  1350  | £40 |£54   |  £37| £40
  Roving frames, drag        |       |        |     |      |     |
    principle, per spindle   |   305 |   345  | £12 |£13   |  £10| £11
  Regulating motion          |   330 |   370  | £13 |£14   |  £10| £11
                             |       |        |     |      |     |
  _Preparation of Tow._      |       |        |     |      |     |
                             |       |        | £.  |_s._  |   £.|  _s._
  Batting or opening machine |   500 |    ..  |  20 | ..   |   15|  ..
  Beetle                     |   500 |    ..  |  20 | ..   |   15|  ..
  Cards (breakers) 48 inch   |       |        |     |      |     |
    diameter, per inch       |    70 |    ..  |   2 | 16   |    2|  10
                                     |        |     |      |     |
  Diameter  Lift                     |        |     |      |     |
     of      of     Pitch.           |        |     |      |     |
  rollers. bobbin.                   |        |     |      |     |
  1½ in.   2 in.  2½ in. per spindle |    34  |   1 |  7   | ..  |18_s._
                                                                 | 6_d._
  2 in.    2 in.  2¾ in. per spindle |36f. 50c|   1 |   9  |    1|
  2½ in.   2½ in.  3 in. per spindle |   39   |   1 |  11  |    1| 2_s._
                                                                 | 6_d._
  3 in.    3 in.  3 in. per spindle  |   39   |   1 |  11  |    1| 2_s._
                                                                 | 6_d._
  If the back rollers be of brass    |        |     |      |     |
    instead of wood, the price will  |        |     |      |     |
    be increased per spindle         |    2   | ..  |1_s._ |  .. |6_d._
                                     |        |     |7_d._ |     |
  Reel, 40 spindles                  |  250   | 10  | ..   |  10 |  ..
  Bundling machine                   |  600   | 24  | ..   |  15 |  ..

       *       *       *       *       *

The following is a list of some other articles used in various branches
of manufactures with the prices at Ghent.

                                                                    Francs
  Machine à bobiner des échevettes à 80 bobines                      600

  Idem, des échevettes et des fusieaux à 80 bobines                  638

  Idem, des fuseaux ou Winding Machine, à 80 bobines,
    systême Anglais                                                  530

  Machine à Ourdir, ou Warping Machine, systême Anglais, de la largeur
    de 107 à 150 centimêtres dans le rot                             520

  Machine à Parer, ou Dressing Machine, systême écossais perfectionné,
  large 107 centimêtres dans le rot                                 1610

  Idem, même construction, large 108 centimêtres, dans le rot       1655

  Idem, même construction, large 129 centimêtres dans le rot        1710

  Idem, même construction, large 152 centimêtres dans le rot        1810

  Idem, ystème Anglais perfectionné, large 107 centimêtres dans le rot
                                                                    1400

  Métier à Tisser, ou Power Loom, dernier systême perfectionné, pour
  calicots unis, large 107 centimêtres under pick ou over pick       255

  Idem, pour calicots croisés, large 107 centimêtres dans le rot     290

  Idem, pour calicots unis, large 118 centimêtres dans le rot        264

  Idem, pour calicots unis, large 129 centimêtres dans le rot        274

  Idem, pour calicots croisés, de 118 centimêtres dans le rot        300

  Idem, pour calicots croisés de 129 centimêtres dans le rot         310

  Idem, pour calicots unis de 152 centimêtres dans le rot            289

  Idem, pour calicots croisés de 152 centimêtres dans le rot (lorsque
    les métiers à tisser sont demandés avec double ensouple, le prix
    augmente de 12 francs par métier. L’atelier construit toutes les
    largeurs que l’on indique)                                       325

  Dandy Loom, ou métier à tisser à la main                           130

  Métier à Tisser mécaniquement les velours, piloux, cuir Anglais, et
  autres étoffes 450

  Machine à plier et les étoffes



MÉCANIQUES DIVERSES.

                                                                   Francs
  Machine à carder les piloux, brevetée en Angleterre, récemment
  introduite                                                        1250

  Machine longitudinale à tondre les piloux, largeur 70 à 73 centimêtres
                                                                    1800

  Calandre en fonte à double levier, avec deux rouleaux en papier, un
  rouleau creux en fonte, poli pour lustrer                         3000

  Presse Hydraulique à piston de 6 pouces de diamêtre avec deux pompes en
  cuivre de la force de 64,000 kilogrammes                          2050

  Presses Hydrauliques, de la même construction, de 64,000 jusqu’à 300
  mille kilogrammes. Les prix en sont établis suivant leur degré de force

  Filtre en fer, breveté, pour raffineries de sucre, à deux
    plateaux                                                        1400

  Idem, même construction, à trois plateaux                         1685

  Balance à bascule portative, systême Américain, nouvellement
    introduit, à l’usage des manufactures, forges, maisons de roulage,
    etc.

  Idem, à pont fixé sur maçonnerie propre à la pesée des voitures

  Moulin, pour moudre la drèche à l’usage des brasseurs

  Laminoirs pour le plomb en toute dimension

  Roues hydrauliques en fer, moleurs ou objets pour mouvements, tels que
  arbres, chaises, supports, poulies de toutes dimensions, engrenages de
  toutes espèces

  Plans de Fondations et de dispositions générales pour toute industrie


             *       *       *       *       *
    NOTA.--La couverture des cilindres de pression et les garnitures de
    cardes ne sont pas comprises dans les prix du tarif. Les machines
    sont prises dans nos ateliers, l’emballage, le transport et le
    montage sont à charge de l’acquéreur.

    Les conditions de payement sont: ⅓ du total de la commande en
    donnant l’ordre, le second tiers au moment de l’expédition. (Pour
    l’étranger,) à condition qu’une maison belge se constitue garant du
    dernier tiers, payable trois mois après l’expédition, (toutes les
    mesures sont anglaises).


                                No. II.

                             INSTRUCTIONS
                                FOR THE
                         CULTIVATION OF FLAX,
                                AND THE
                         PREPARATION OF LINEN,

 _Circulated amongst the Peasantry of Flanders, by the Société Linière
                             of Brussels_.

                (TRANSLATED FROM THE FLEMISH ORIGINAL).

From the information collected in France, in Lille and in Paris,
one important fact can be deduced, that Belgium _may_ preserve her
incontestible superiority in the linen manufacture; but that to do
so, she must, more than ever, make it a point to manufacture goods of
that sterling and solid quality, to which she owes her reputation.
We have, in consequence, to request all the committees of the
different districts of the Association to unite with us in awakening
the attention of the growers, the spinners, the manufacturers, the
bleachers, and those who finish the linen and make it up, each in his
own department, and to bring under their notice every point in which it
may be possible to improve the old systems.

It is particularly necessary that every means should be adopted to
bring it specially before the manufacturers, that it is impossible they
can preserve our interesting manufacture in its ancient splendour,
unless they give the most constant care to make a better and more solid
article than the manufacturers of other countries, and that they cannot
continue to attract foreign merchants to our markets, unless they
rigorously abstain from any fraud or deception.

Sometimes the teeth of the reeds are at unequal distances; again, acids
of a corroding nature are used in the process of bleaching the yarn, to
the detriment of the quality. It is necessary to convince those who may
co-operate in frauds of this nature, or in any deception whatever, that
in doing an injury to the nation, in the national manufacture, they are
injuring themselves; and that, on the other hand, those who may assist
in re-establishing the ancient renown of Belgium in the manufacture of
linen, will be the first to reap its fruits.

With this end, and to lay the foundation for the accomplishment of
this object, we now submit the following observations, which have been
suggested by a voyage in Germany, in which minute attention was paid to
the different processes of manufacture, as practised in that country.
We recommend them to the serious attention of all the spinners,
manufacturers and merchants, and will eagerly receive from them any
ideas or information, which experience may enable them to transmit to
us, to aid in the compilation of definitive instructions.


CULTURE OF THE FLAX.

In the districts of Courtrai, St. Nicholas, and Tournai, flax is
cultivated in perfection, but nowhere else is the cultivation what
could be wished. Thus, the culture of flax has increased, without the
art of cultivation making any progress. The quality of the flax, even
the abundance of the crop, depends much upon the selection of the seed.
In general, the seed which we import from the North, succeeds, but for
a few years past, the merchants engaged in the business have taken
advantage of the confidence reposed in them by the farmers. What they
sold as genuine Riga seed, was, really a mixture. Thus, in several
districts where it was sown, the crop sprang up but partially and
imperfectly. The committee will take measures to give the farmer more
security in his purchases, and adopt means to import direct genuine
Riga seed.

It has been observed, that when the seed is sown early, as soon as the
season permits germination, the crop is always better, both in quantity
and quality. Experience, also, teaches that good tillage and abundance
of manure, have a great influence on the quality of the crop. The
spade should be used in preference to the plough, as it pulverizes the
ground better. This it is which makes it so difficult to cultivate
flax in large quantities, and in a number of acres together.

On the fineness of the stalk, depends the fineness of the fibre. To
obtain, therefore, fine flax, the seed must be sown very thickly, which
can only be done where the soil is well manured and properly tilled.

It has been proved that when the flax is pulled between the falling of
the flower and the formation of the seed, the fibre is finer and more
solid than at any other time, so that unless it is wished to sacrifice
the quality of the flax to obtain seed, the former must not await the
full maturity of the latter.

Above all things the rotation of crops must be scrupulously observed;
if seven or eight years be allowed to elapse before again sowing flax
in the same field, it is certain that there will be a good crop; but
the less the interval between the two crops, the less is the second to
be calculated on either for quality or weight.

We need not observe how necessary it is to the production of good flax,
that the weeding of the fields should be attended to with great care.


WATERING.

In Belgium this process is conducted under two different systems. At
Courtrai, when pulled, it is allowed to dry on the field, and is kept
over all winter before steeping. In this district, as is well known,
the flax is steeped in the clear and running waters of the Lys, where
it is perfectly pure from any slime or mud.

In the Flanders district (Pays de Waes), the flax is steeped
immediately after pulling, being put in the water whilst still green,
the water used being stagnant. We think that in general the preference
must be given to the system employed in Flanders; firstly, because it
is difficult to find such a river as the Lys, where the waters are
so free from any filth; and secondly, because the flax when steeped
before it dries is softer and more mellow, and the fibre is whiter, not
having that yellow tint which is always found in flax that has been
dried. The linens which we saw in Germany were of a pure and silvery
white, and the system pursued there in steeping is that of Flanders.
It was pointed out to us that the fibre of flax which had been dried
is equally strong, but that it is harder and more yellow. Steeping in
the manner followed in Flanders demands great care and attention, and
a particular knowledge of the process. As it is not possible for us to
explain all the details, we will confine ourselves to requesting the
district committees to send us from Flanders some persons competent to
give all the instructions necessary for performing it with success.

After the steeping, it is found to improve the quality to keep the flax
for a long time in the straw. The older the flax is the better it is.
If before it had any faults; if, for example, it had been spotted, and
a bad colour from being badly exposed, it becomes equalized and uniform
by remaining for a long time in the straw heaped together.

It is good to keep over the flax before spinning it, not only in the
straw, but after scutching, and even after hackling. The Germans attach
great importance to having a soft and silky fibre. To this end they
beat the flax after it is scutched, they rub it with an iron comb
without teeth, and they are especially careful to let it grow old,
either in straw or after it has been scutched.


SPINNING.

As a general and incontestible rule, it is necessary in order to make
good yarn, to proportion the quality of the flax to the description
of yarn to be spun. If fine yarn be produced from flax of an inferior
quality, the quality of the yarn, and necessarily the cloth, will be
bad. It is then a very prejudicious idea, that with any kind of flax,
fine yarn can be produced. It is equally necessary to hackle the
flax, according to the fineness and quality of the yarn to be spun.
The finer and better the yarn to be produced, the more should the tow
be separated from the solid fibres. Great care should be given to
the process of spinning--it is the fingers that spin, the wheel only
twists. The length of the fibre contributes much to the solidity of the
yarn, it is, therefore, important to place the flax upon the distaff so
that the spinner can always take the fibre by the end, and not by the
middle. This observation has been made in France, in the neighbourhood
of Valenciennes and Cambrai, where the good yarn for lace is produced.
The spinning wheel should be adapted to the description of the yarn
to be produced, the smaller the _wheel_, the more open and flat will
be the yarn. The larger it is, the more the yarn is round and twisted.
There is this distinction to make between warp and weft, that the
former requires to be more twisted than the latter. To make good cloth,
the thread of the warp should be round, that of the weft flat and open.
Yarn for thread should be more twisted than the other descriptions.
This is the reason that at Lempleuve wheels of great diameter, and
turned by three cords, are used.

At a moment in which mill-spun yarn, the rival production to hand-spun
yarn, lays claim to a superiority, which it bases upon the uniform
equality of its thread, the hand-spinners must strain every nerve
to attain this equality. It is essential that they avoid, as much
as possible, any knots or lumps in the yarn, that they extract any
particles of tow their fingers may meet. We could also recommend
that the operation may be conducted with extreme cleanliness, that
any stains of oil, coal, &c., be avoided, or anything which may be
difficult to remove in the bleaching. The Germans beat their yarn a
good deal before weaving it, to render it more soft and supple, they
affirm that they thereby improve the quality of the cloth. According
to them, the softer and more yielding the yarn, the firmer and more
solid will be the cloth when bleached, it has not the disadvantage of
being too hard and stiff, and, therefore, fraying at the folds. The
system may be the object of experiment. It is, also, useful to prepare
the yarn by boiling it in a solution of alkali, and by soaking it in
milk. Ashes from beech wood are to be preferred to those from ash. This
is at least the result of their experience in Germany. We submit the
observation to our merchants and manufacturers, to induce them to make
a trial, and to communicate to us afterwards the result. The use of any
chemical agent in bleaching must be rigorously abstained from, their
use has been constantly prohibited by our ancient laws, and even by
royal edicts.


WEAVING.

The piece of cloth should be throughout uniform in fabric, and in
colour. It is then indispensable, as well for the weft as for the warp,
to use yarn from the same description of flax. There must be none
of those dry and dead fibres, so that they do not disappear in the
bleaching.

The warp and the weft should be as much as possible each spun from the
same specimen.

Numerous complaints are raised against the manufacturers of reeds and
against the weavers; the latter do not give sufficient attention to the
weaving, and some of them use fraudulent means. Thus the reeds have
sometimes not the sufficient number of teeth; again, sometimes one
part of the web is well, and another badly woven, with, as regards the
number of threads and the workmanship. Frauds of this kind are pointed
out at nearly every market; they were formerly punished by regulations
of police, but these preventive measures exist but in a few of the
markets, and there incompletely. It would be well that the municipal
administrations, who have public markets of linen, would revive them
vigorously to give again confidence to the trade. We will, hereafter,
give the details of these old laws. The measure to be taken relative
to the regulations for the weaving are under the consideration of the
direction of the committee and the consul general; they are seeking
means to put a stop to the fraudulent manufactures which unfortunately
have been numerous of late years, and which would end, after having
ruined the commerce, by entirely destroying the manufacture, and taking
away from the country an important source of occupation and existence.

It is still complained of some weavers that they neglect the care of
cleanliness: they should bear in mind that cloth stained with oil, or
of which the warp has been dressed with any greasy substance, as is
commonly the case, cannot be perfectly bleached.

Another complaint against many weavers is, that they use pumice
stone to give a gloss to the cloth, not remarking that it injures it
considerably.

In Germany they do not employ mill spun yarn, it is there considered
that it can only produce bad cloth.

It is quite necessary to improve the construction of the looms; when a
loom is straight and well placed, a woman can manage it as easily as a
man. With a good loom more work can be done per day. The most essential
part to observe is, that the part which drives the weft should be
always horizontal. Soon each of the District Committee will have a
loom on a new model, so that they may show it to all the weavers. The
director of the committee has caused some looms to be brought from
Bielefield, he is, at the same time, engaged in improving the one
in general use, which he thinks is defective in many parts. On this
subject the District Committee are requested to assist the director by
sending from their respective districts a dexterous mechanic to give
his opinion on the proposed improvements.

For the sizing of the warp, the Germans use a paste made of flour, the
same as we do. In general they employ _rye flour_ for plain linen, but
very carefully sifted. For fancy or damask cloth they use wheat flour.
We may again remark that they pay great attention to the sifting, so
that no seed may be in the paste. The work-rooms should be suitable to
the quality of the work, better lit and consequently more airy. The
workmen have every thing to gain in preserving a precious health for
their family; a robust man can do more work than an invalid. In Germany
the work-rooms contain four looms with ease, and are lit by glass
windows the same as the shops in our towns. We remind all that when a
work-room is well arranged, and when everything is in its place, the
work is done with more perfection, more regularity, and, finally, with
more economy.


BLEACHING.

The Germans pay great attention to the first washing of the linen, in
which they use a fluted beetle, fixed so as to rub the cloth, without
striking it or bruising it too rudely. They shun all chemical agents,
they use water from the purest sources, and constantly renew it. The
sizing is effected with a starch, made at Cologne. We brought a sample
of it, which we keep for the inspection of all; it is thought to be of
a better quality than ours; and I am inclined to believe, that it is to
the superior starch that the German linens owe their silky gloss. The
drying is effected in lofts, well constructed and spacious, where the
cloth is protected as well from the sun as from the rain. They employ
rollers for stretching and turning the linen, which make every movement
easy. We desire to see our bleachers imitate the Germans in the care
which they bestow on the details of the operations which we have just
examined.


CALENDERING.

No one is ignorant that, with us, this process is far from perfect.
We must, then, call the attention of those who practice it, to the
improvements that their machines call for. On this subject, the
Director is ready to communicate all the ideas he has gathered. The
calender or mangle which the Germans use, is sixty feet long, eight or
nine broad, and fifteen high. A box, filled with stones, supported by
two wooden cylinders, of six or seven inches in diameter, is moved
backward and forward, alternately, upon a wooden plank, perfectly
level; the linen is rolled round the wooden cylinders, and remains
there for a quarter of an hour. This system gives a flat finish, the
cloth being dry, and passing without heat.

At Bielefield there exists another machine, called “the English
Beetling Machine,” by which a rounder finish is obtained than by the
calender, and which increases, momentarily, at least, the width of the
cloth. In this operation, the linen, when dried and folded, is placed
on a table of polished stone, and beetled by heavy mallets.


ATTENTION PAID TO THE SALE.

To facilitate the sale of their linens, the Germans think themselves
obliged to resort to the seduction of the fold, the envelope, and even
the colour of the paper. We can affirm, that attention to all these
little points, produces excellent results.


  No. III.

                               PETITION
                                OF THE
      COTTON MANUFACTURERS AND CALICO PRINTERS OF BELGIUM TO THE
                      CHAMBER OF REPRESENTATIVES.
                           _December 1839_.


A MESSIEURS LES MEMBRES DE LA CHAMBRE DES REPRÉSENTANTS.

Le 10 Septembre 1835, la Chambre des Représentants, dont faisait déjà
partie la majorité de l’assemblée actuelle, a déclaré que l’Industrie
Cotonnière dans sa généralité, n’était pas suffisamment protégée. Cette
déclaration a été faite après enquête et discussion. Tout aussitôt
le Ministre des finances a promis de présenter un projet de loi qui
remplirait le vœu que la législature venait d’émettre; et chacun
dès-lors se tint dans l’attente de la mesure promise.

Quatre années sont maintenant écoulées; il n’a plus été question ni
du projet du Ministre, ni de la déclaration de la Chambre, de cette
déclaration qui pourtant renfermait un projet de haute sollicitude et
que l’on ne rappelle ici que comme un témoignage de la prévoyance, qui
animait cette assemblée lorsqu’elle fut appelée à se prononcer sur
la situation et l’avenir de l’une des branches de travail les plus
importantes du pays.

En effet, Messieurs les Réprésentants, ce qui s’est passé depuis le
jour, où a été donné ce témoignage d’intérêt, et la situation présente,
tout vient à l’appui du jugement qui a été porté dans votre enceinte.
Tout a renforcé l’opinion alors émise. Veuillez en être juges: Au
milieu de l’immense élan que la production manufacturière a prise en
Belgique, à compter de 1835, l’Industrie Cotonnière s’est consumée en
efforts inutiles pour participer à ce mouvement. En 1835, 1836, 1837,
et 1838, sa production s’est élevée un peu au-dessus des années 1831,
1832, 1833 et 1834, mais elle n’a pu retrouver l’importance que l’année
1829 et le commencement de 1830 lui avaient donnée. Elle est restée à
la seconde époque, surtout quant aux résultats, beaucoup au-dessous
de la première. Nous sommes à même d’en fournir la preuve par des
documents incontestables.

Et cependant depuis 1835 de nouveaux capitaux ont été versés dans
l’Industrie Cotonnière, sans doute parce qu’il semblait à chacun que
le gouvernement ne pouvait différer longtemps de se conformer à la
politique commerciale que lui avaient tracée les Chambres en plusieurs
circonstances, et notamment dans la séance du 10 Septembre. A compter
de cette époque, les procédés des filateurs et des imprimeurs furent
améliorés, renouvelés en partie; des voyages d’observation entrepris
à l’étranger pour mettre le pays quant aux méthodes et aux machines
au niveau de ses concurrents. Et remarquez-le bien, Messieurs les
Représentants, ces dépenses ont été faites, non dans des espérances
de bénéfices, il ne nous a pas été possible d’en faire; mais nous
agissions dans un esprit de conservation; c’est pour l’intérêt de notre
existence même que nous faisions ces efforts. Et c’est ce qui explique
comment le nombre des Power-Looms s’est considérablement accru.

C’est aussi ce qui explique les perfectionnements de détail introduits
dans les filatures et dans les fabriques d’impressions. Plus d’une
fois, ceux-là même qui obéissant à des préventions inspirées par
des doctrines creuses et subversives de toute prospérité, se sont
constitués les adversaires de l’Industrie Cotonnière, l’ont reconnu;
seulement ils ont prétendu en tirer argument contre nous. Ils ont dit
que toutes ces améliorations étaient un indice de prospérité; qu’elles
allaient ouvrir la voie à de nouveaux profits; qu’ainsi le régime
douanier auquel est soumise notre branche d’industrie était excellent;
qu’il fallait se garder d’y porter atteinte. On n’a malheureusement que
trop obéi à ces inspirations!

Les faits, mais des faits irrécusables détruisent de fond en comble ces
chimériques assertions.

De 1829 à 1838, l’Industrie Cotonnière a suivi en Angleterre, en
France, en Allemagne, aux Etats-Unis, une marche ascensionnelle
accablante pour notre pays, lors-qu’on la compare à l’état dans lequel
nous sommes restés. L’accroissement roule de 50 à 75 p. c., suivant des
calculs officiels que nous publierons plus tard. Et malgré l’influence
que l’accroissement de la population a du avoir sur la consommation
intérieure, la Belgique est en 1838, au-dessous de la production de
1829; au-dessous non seulement pour les profits, ceci est hors de
doute, mais même pour l’importance.

Permettez-nous d’appeler votre attention sur d’autres circonstances de
détail, mais qui vont rendre notre démonstration plus frappante.

Il y avait à Bruxelles en 1830, quatre filatures de premier ordre en
activité. En 1839, il n’en reste qu’une et celle-là même ne marche pas
encore.

De plus, quatre filatures de second ordre ont dans le même
temps disparu de cette localité. Parmi les propriétaires de ces
établissements, ceux qui ne sont pas tombés en déconfiture, out profité
d’incendies qui sont venus dévorer leurs fabriques, pour se retirer
d’une industrie où l’expérience est inutile et où le travail semble à
tout jamais condamné à la plus désolante stérilité. Il faut toutefois
excepter celle de messieurs Prévinaire et Seny, filatures de 6000
broches, passée à la Hollande, et cela en 1836, à l’époque même où l’on
soutient que dans notre pays cette branche d’industrie prospérait. Qui
pourrait voir rien de volontaire dans de pareils déplacements, dans de
semblables liquidations? Comment affirmer que des faits de cette nature
ne cachent rien de désastreux?

A la face du pays et la main sur la conscience, nous déclarons que
l’Industrie Cotonnière a constamment langui depuis 1830. Notre intime
conviction est qu’elle est atteinte d’un mal organique, sous lequel
elle succombe lentement; elle marche à sa ruine; et la cause principale
existe dans l’inexécution de la politique commerciale tracée par vous.

Essayera-t-on encore de combattre cette vérité? On n’a déjà entassé
que trop de sophismes et de mensonges pour l’obscurcir. L’industrie
Cotonnière souffre et dépérit, a-t-on dit, la faute en est aux
fabricants qui ne savent pas profiter des avantages que notre position
topographique leur offre et qui refusent d’exploiter les débouchés
qui leur sont ouverts.--Vous ne le croirez pas, Messieurs les
Représentants. Il vous répugnera d’admettre que des fabricants vieillis
dans l’étude de leur profession et dans la pratique des affaires
commerciales, soient capables de repousser avec une stupide opiniâtreté
les occasions de profit qu’ils auraient sous la main et fermeraient
l’oreille à des conseils que dicterait la connaissance réelle des
marchés lointains. Eh quoi! tandis qu’en Belgique tous les industriels
jouissent d’une réputation de vigilance justement acquise, tandis
qu’autour de nous tous les peuples rendent justice à l’excellence de
notre coup-d’œil, à la supériorité de notre esprit pratique, de notre
savoir industriel, ceux-là seulement qui appartiennent à l’Industrie
Cotonnière feraient exception à la règle commune! Seraient-ils donc
sortis d’une race autre que celle qui jadis, après avoir approvisionné
toutes les contrées de leurs étoffes, surent donner leurs artisans pour
maîtres à toutes les nations?

Si donc, Messieurs, l’on vous disait que la détresse de l’Industrie
n’est le résultat que de l’ignorance, de l’entêtement ou de l’apathie,
de votre propre mouvement vous sauriez en mettre la cause ailleurs. Et
en effet, pour apprécier la valeur des hommes qu’on traite avec tant de
dédain et si peu de pitié, voici ce qui vous frapperait d’abord:

Depuis 1835, de graves écarts out été commis en industrie; on a
fait plus d’un faux pas. L’industrie Cotonnière s’est abstenue de
toute extravagance. Elle ne s’est pas laissé émouvoir; et se tenant
soigneusement en dehors de tout calcul d’agiotage, elle est restée
attachée aux principes de morale qui seuls fécondent le travail. Elle
ne s’est trouvée mêlée à toute cette agitation que pour voir renchérir
tous les objets de première nécessité.

Cependant une crise est arrivée. Dans ce moment critique pour le pays,
l’Industrie Cotonnière a su encore conserver une assez bonne attitude.
Au milieu de nombreuses catastrophes, ceux de ses établissements qui
marchaient encore sont restés debout. Les hommes qui se sont conduits
ainsi n’étaient assurément pas des industriels incapables.

Mais à la suite de ces circonstances calamiteuses et nonobstant tous
les préparatifs qu’en hommes prévoyants ils avaient saits pour tenir
tête à l’orage, ils se sentent aujourd’hui lentement et douloureusement
minés par le mal contre lequel, tant de fois déjà depuis 1830, ils out
lutté avec plus de constance que de succès.

Ils se sentent dominés, écrasés par l’industrie étrangère. Le marché
intérieur chaque jour leur échappe et chaque jour aussi se resserre
devant eux l’espace qui leur restait au dehors pour écouler leurs
produits.

Par là se trouve pleinement confirmée la déclaration parlementaire de
1835 que l’Industrie Cotonnière n’est pas suffisamment protégée, que la
législation douanière est insuffisante.

Veuillez prendre la peine, Messieurs, de réfléchir sur la situation de
l’Industrie Cotonnière et vous reconnaîtrez ce qu’elle a de singulier
et à première vue d’inexplicable. Nous sommes tout aussi habiles
que nos concurrents de l’étranger; la situation topographique de la
Belgique est avantageuse; à certains égards, nous pourrions travailler
avec autant ou plus d’économie que beaucoup d’industriels d’autres
contrées; et cependant, si l’on ne doit rien changer à l’état de
choses actuel, il nous est bien décidément impossible de soutenir la
concurrence. La lutte nous deviendra mortelle à la longue.

Et pourrait-il en être autrement? Nous partageons notre marché
intérieur avec nos voisins, nous ne pouvons pas aller partager le
marché de nos voisins avec eux. Ils viennent chez nous, nous n’allons
pas chez eux. Il y a là une cause constante d’inégalité, car nos
concurrents commencent par réaliser chez eux des bénéfices qui les
mettent à même de vendre à plus bas prix en Belgique. La véritable
économie pour un fabricant est de produire le plus qu’il peut dans un
temps donné. Pour vendre à bon marché, il faut vendre beaucoup, c’est
une vérité démontrée. Or, notre consommation est trop minime, réduite
qu’elle est par les introductions étrangères. Pour les impressions, par
exemple, les frais de gravure d’un rouleau sont les mêmes en France
et en Angleterre qu’en Belgique. Avec le même rouleau un fabricant
français fera 500 pièces; un fabricant anglais 5000; un imprimeur belge
n’en fera quelquefois que 50. Il en est des impressions sur étoffes
comme des impressions sur papier; le livre qu’on tire à un nombre
considérable d’exemplaires, se vend à peu de chose près pour le coût du
papier. Les étoffes imprimées qui arrivent de France ou d’Angleterre en
Belgique, s’offrent à un prix qui représente la valeur du calicot.

C’est surtout en temps de crise qu’il devient impossible aux fabricants
belges de résister à cette concurrence écrasante. Ce qui par dessus
tout fait du mal à notre industrie, ce sont les soldes de magasin,
que périodiquement nos rivaux de France et d’Angleterre envoient dans
notre pays, avec ordre de s’en défaire à tous prix. Tel tissu de coton
imprimé qui au printemps aura été vendu par eux à 3 fr. l’aune, fera
partie huit à neuf mois plus tard de ces envois de pacotille qu’on sera
content de vendre à un 1 fr. 50 et même 1 fr. 25 l’aune. Voilà donc les
cotons les plus fins et les plus chers, mis en concurrence directe
avec les articles courants du pays. Les fabricants étrangers, avant
de commencer une nouvelle campagne avec leurs dessins nouveaux, font
maison nette de ce qui leur reste en magasin; et c’est particulièrement
la Belgique qu’ils inondent, car ils ne veulent pas gâter les prix sur
leur marché principal, qu’ils se réservent à eux seuls. A tout prix ils
doivent donc exporter; et par sa situation, la Belgique est à portée de
tous.

Plus la mévente est générale chez nos voisins et plus l’inconvénient
que nous signalons devient ruineux pour notre pays. Nous souffrons de
nos crises, nous souffrons encore plus de celles de l’étranger; car si
jusqu’à un certain point, on peut avec de la sagacité voir venir les
premières, comment prévoir les secondes? En ce moment ce n’est pas à
1 fr. 50, ni à 1 fr. 25 l’aune que les impressions de Mulhouse sont
offertes en Belgique, on les obtient facilement à 1 fr. 10 l’aune de
France, faisant l’équivalent de 64 centimes pour l’aune de Brabant;
et c’est à ce prix avili que des voyageurs, après les avoir fait
entrer moyennant 8½ p. c. de prime de fraude, transport compris,[17]
les colportent dans les villes et dans les plus petits villages de
la Belgique. Que sert aux fabricants, contre de pareils débordements
d’étoffes, et leur vigilance, et leur rigidité, et leur économie,
et leur esprit d’ordre et de calcul. Ils ne peuvent qu’affirmer
sans crainte que personne puisse les démentir, que de pareils prix
présentent de la perte sur le prix de revient des étoffes qu’ils
fabriquent et impriment.

A ceux qui leur reprochent de ne pas s’occuper assez d’exportation,
tout ce qui précède peut déjà répondre; mais qui donc pourrait
méconnaître que, pour exporter avec fruit, il faut être assuré d’abord
d’un certain débit sur le marché intérieur? Le marché intérieur est
donc indispensable, et pour les fabricants belges, c’est justement ce
qui leur manque.

L’Industrie Cotonnière avait dans les Indes Néerlandaises un débouché
que les faveurs spéciales, accordées au pavillon et aux produits des
Pays-Bas, devait rendre exclusif à son profit. Tout le trop plein de
la fabrication intérieure s’écoulait donc vers ces contrées, dont
la consommation s’accroissait de jour en jour. Le marché intérieur
venait-il à être surchargé de marchandises, soit par un excès de
production, soit par une introduction surabondante de fabricants
étrangers, le fabricant cessant de produire pour la consommation
indigène, allait écouler à Java ce qu’il avait en magasin, sans être
obligé de suspendre ses travaux. Dans le même temps le marché de la
Hollande toute entière, où se trouvent 2 millions ½ de consommateurs,
lui était ouvert en concurrence avec l’étranger. Quelques préférences
lui étaient pourtant accordées. Aujourd’hui le débouché des Indes
Orientales est perdu, celui de la Hollande se perd tous les jours,
parce que nous y retrouvons comme en Belgique le trop plein, les
queues de partie de la France et de l’Angleterre; naguère encore nous
avons perdu dans le Limbourg et le Luxembourg 350,000 concitoyens
et consommateurs. Voilà les faits dans toute leur vérité. Comment
après cela soutenir encore que la situation actuelle de l’Industrie
Cotonnière est tolérable, qu’elle est meilleure qu’en 1830. Encore une
fois, MM. les Représentants, votre bon sens, votre patriotisme, se
soulèveront contre d’aussi grossières erreurs. Et reportant ensuite
votre pensée sur la sévérité de la politique commerciale suivie par des
nations voisines, vous vous direz qu’une seule voie de salut reste à
notre industrie la possession de notre marché intérieur. Vous nous le
donnerez, Messieurs, en retirant aux étrangers la part que la fraude
leur a jusqu’à présent laissé prendre, ou vous nous adjoindrez à un
plus grand territoire.

Nous vous prions donc de nous assurer, mais de nous assurer par des
moyens efficaces, ce qui est notre droit légitime, c’est-à-dire la
possession du seul marché qui nous reste, ou d’y suppléer soit par
une réunion douanière avec la France, soit par l’accession à la ligue
commerciale allemande. C’est notre seul espoir de salut. Nous vous
prions encore de vous occuper de cette situation sans retard, nos
souffrances sont vives, elles durent depuis long-temps; si contre
toute attente l’impossibilité de nous secourir devait être finalement
reconnue, comme dernière faveur, nous demanderions qu’on voulût bien
nous le dire. Nous en profiterions pour abréger notre longue agonie, et
pour en finir avec les sacrifices, avec ces luttes dans lesquelles nous
dissipons à la fois notre temps et nos capitaux. Ainsi, Messieurs,
c’est encore un service que vous nous rendrez si par votre intervention
nous obtenons que le Gouvernement s’explique.

Mais nous en sommes convaincus nous n’aurons pas fait un appel inutile
à vos lumières pas plus qu’à votre patriotisme: vous le savez et
jamais votre cœur ne l’oubliera, de l’existence de nos établissements
dépendent directement plus de 10,000 familles, plus de 50,000 individus
y compris les hommes, les femmes et les enfants; ils appartiennent à
toutes les provinces; aux campagnes tout aussi bien qu’aux villes; et
vous sentirez que si ce moyen de travail leur était enlevé, il serait
absolument impossible de leur en procurer un autre. Vous sentirez
donc la nécessité de réunir vos efforts pour conserver à la Belgique
une branche d’industrie qu’une volonté ferme sauvera, et qui n’attend
qu’une resolution vigoureuse pour grandir, et s’affranchir du tribut
qu’elle paie à l’étranger.

Vous jetterez les yeux sur l’importance de cette branche de
fabrication, sur la somme de capitaux qu’elle employe et sur celle
qu’elle représente; et vous vous direz que si un jour, par excès
d’indifférence, on permettait que des établissements dont en 1835 votre
commission centrale a estimé la production annuelle à 45 millions de
francs s’écroulassent, les reproches qui viendraient atteindre les
auteurs de cette catastrophe ne pourraient jamais être trop sévères.
Vous ne voudrez donc pas en gardant le silence, que qui que ce soit
puisse jamais essayer de faire peser l’accusation sur vous. Il vous
suffira de dire que la déclaration faite par vous en 1835 n’a pas
cessé d’exister; vous inviterez le Gouvernement à remplir sans délai
les promesses qu’il a faites; et vous pouvez être certains, Messieurs
les Représentants, que désormais les vœux que vous exprimerez en
notre faveur seront d’autant mieux accueillis, qu’au Ministre qui, en
plus d’une circonstance, refusa de nous entendre, a afin succédé le
représentant de la ville de Gand, qui en tant d’occasions se constitua
le défenseur de nos intérêts. Qu’il exécute comme ministre la politique
qu’il a soutenue comme député, et l’Industrie Cotonnière sera sauvée;
elle renaîtra bientôt du milieu de ses débris.

Agréez, Messieurs les Représentants, l’expression de notre profond
respect.


_Les Membres de la Commission Directrice de l’Association en faveur de
l’Industrie Cotonnière_,

DE SMET-DE NAEYERE, _Président_.

P. ROSSEEL, _Vice-Président_.

VERHAEGHE-DE NAEYERE, _Trésorier_.

E. J. BRAECKMAN, CEUTBRICKX, F. CLAES, E. COPPENS, DE COCK,
PARIDAEN-VANDERWAERDEN, VAN HUFFEL, VOORTMAN, _Membres_; BRIAVOINNE,
_Secrétaire_.


COMITÉ DE BRUXELLES.

  REY, Ainé.
  SENY-LEFRANC.
  DEPOORTER, Ainé.
  DELEEMANS.
  HEIMBOURG.
  DE DECKER.
  MASSON COLLARD.


COMITÉ DE COURTRAI.

  VAN ZANTVOORDE.
  CATTEAUX-GAUQUIÉ.
  HELDENBERGH-COUCKE.
  AUG. HUYSENTRUYT.
  ROMMENS.
  C. NAESENS.
  F. ROSSEUW.
  G. MARNEFFE.
  DATHIS.
  A. OVYN.
  J. LAMOTTE.
  TRUYFFAUT.
  C. DUJARDIN.


COMITÉ DE ST. NICOLAS.

  DELRÉE ET FILS.
  TALBOOM-JOOS.
  VAN LANDEGHEM TALBOOM.
  VAN NAEMEN-BOEYÉ.
  J. NYSSEN.
  WAUTERS-VEREECKEN.


COMITÉ DE RENAIX.

  TH. BASCLE.
  BOGAERT-MALINGREAU.
  WILLEQUET-CARLIER.
  VANDEN DRIESSCHE-VERSTRAETEN.
  WALLEMACQ.
  F. DE KEYSER.
  HOOREMAN-CAMBIER.

Certifié les signatures ci-dessus apposées sur les copies du présent
mémoire déposées entre nos mains.

_Le Président de la Commission-Directrice_, DE SMET-DE NAEYERE.

_Le Secrétaire_, BRIAVIONNE.

Gand 14, Décembre, 1889.


                                No. IV.

                         EXTRAIT D’UN MÉMOIRE.

                      ADRESSE LE 3 OCTOBRE 1814,
               AUX HAUTES PUISSANCES ASSEMBLÉES DANS LE
                          CONGRÈS DE VIENNE,

       _Par MM. les Vicaires-Généraux de Gand, dans l’absence et
   suivant l’intention expresse de Monseigneur le Prince de Broglie,
                           évéque de Gand_.

“Depuis l’établissement de la religion protestante en divers pays de
l’Europe, on ne connaît aucun peuple qui, devant être gouverné par un
prince d’une religion différente de la sienne, n’ait pris auparavant
toutes les précautions possibles pour mettre l’exercice libre de son
culte, tous les droits _et priviléges qui y étaient attachés_, hors de
toute atteinte de la part du souverain.”

A l’appui de cette proposition MM. les vicaires-généraux citent
plusieurs exemples choisis dans l’histoire d’Allemagne.

“Les Belges, disent-ils ensuite, sont d’autant plus fondés à solliciter
des hautes puissances cet acte de justice, que:

I. La religion luthérienne et la réformée ne sont, à proprement
parler, que _tolérées_ en Allemagne par les constitutions de l’empire
germanique, ainsi que la religion catholique, attendu qu’il répugne au
bon sens d’approuver des religions qui se contredisent. Mais dans la
Belgique, la religion catholique a été constamment et authentiquement
approuvée de tout temps.--Les Belges sont donc à bien plus forte
raison fondés à invoquer un droit de garantie formel en faveur d’une
religion qui n’a jamais cessé d’être la leur depuis leur conversion au
christianisme, et dont l’exercice _exclusif_ leur a été constamment
assuré par les traités les plus solennels.

II. Tel est d’ailleurs le véritable intérêt de S. A. R. le prince
d’Orange; car, on ne peut le dissimuler, une assez longue expérience
a prouvé combien les Belges sont attachés à leur religion et en
même temps très chatouilleux sur cet article.... Dès le règne de
Marie-Thérèse ils eurent à se plaindre plusieurs fois de l’influence
de la philosophie moderne sur les mesures de l’administration. On sait
que Joseph II, n’ayant plus gardé de mesure, employa vainement des
voies d’autorité pour obliger les Belges à adopter ses nouveaux plans
_inconciliables avec l’indépendance de la jurisdiction ecclésiastique,
et qu’après une assez longue lutte ils en vinrent enfin jusqu’à secouer
ouvertement le joug_. Un prince plus puissant et plus redoutable ne
réussit pas mieux à subjuguer leurs esprits. La terreur de son nom
et la multitude de ses troupes aguerries maintinrent les Belges dans
la dure oppression; mais il ne parvint jamais à leur faire recevoir
les institutions impériales, celles de l’université, le catéchisme de
l’empire, ni même les quatre articles du clergé de France.... On ne
peut nier que S. A. R. le prince d’Orange ne réunisse en sa personne
toutes les qualités propres à lui concilier les cœurs de ses nouveaux
sujets. Mais les qualités les plus distinguées et les plus aimables
d’un souverain ne sauraient être pour le peuple qu’il doit gouverner,
une garantie suffisante de la conservation de ses droits en matière
de religion. Il n’est pas impossible que ses successeurs ne soient
pas aussi favorablement disposés que lui. D’ailleurs les principaux
dépositaires de son autorité, ne peuvent-ils pas exercer sur l’esprit
du prince une influence très pernicieuse aux vrais intérêts de la
religion?... La plupart des hommes d’état n’attachent plus, de nos
jours, au maintien de la religion de leur pays la même importance qu’on
y attachait autrefois.... Au lieu de _se borner à protéger la religion,
à faire exécuter les lois de l’église, à punir les actes extérieurs
nuisibles à la société religieuse_, ils s’immiscent témérairement dans
les affaires de la religion.

Le véritable intérêt de S. A. R. le prince d’Orange est donc qu’un
pacte inaugural assure aux peuples de la Belgique la conservation
de leur religion, _dans toute l’étendue de leurs anciens pactes
inauguraux_.

III. C’est aussi l’intérêt de l’Europe.... Il importe infiniment au
succès du nouveau système politique, que la Belgique soit aussi
tranquille, aussi heureuse qu’elle peut l’être, et que par conséquent
on ne laisse point germer dans l’esprit des habitants des semences
de défiance, de division _et de trouble, dont il serait un jour
extrêmement difficile d’arrêter le funeste développement_, si l’on ne
pourvoit d’avance à la stabilité inaltérable de l’état de la religion,
_tel qu’il existait autrefois_. Pour cet effet, il entrerait dans
les plans d’une saine politique _de rétablir dans ces provinces les
anciennes constitutions ... nous ne pouvons calculer les résultats d’un
autre système_; mais si l’on ne jugeait pas à propos de rendre à la
Belgique ses antiques et vénérables institutions, ... nous supplions
les hautes puissances assemblées dans le congrès de Vienne, de stipuler
dans le traité définitif de cession de ces provinces à S. A. R. le
prince d’Orange, les articles suivants de garantie en faveur de notre
sainte religion:

1º _Tous les articles_ des anciens pactes inauguraux, constitutions,
chartes, etc. seront maintenus en ce qui concerne, le libre exercice,
les _droits_, _priviléges_, _exemptions_, _prérogatives_, de la
religion catholique ..., _des évêques, prélats, chapitres, avec cette
exception, que le prince souverain et son auguste famille seront libres
de professer leur religion et d’en exercer le culte dans leurs palais,
chateaux et maisons royales_, où les seigneurs de sa cour auront des
chapelles et des ministres de leur religion, _sans qu’il soit permis
d’ériger des temples hors de l’enceinte de ces palais, sous quelque
prétexte que ce soit_.

2º Les affaires ecclésiastiques resteront en mains des autorités
spirituelles, et ce sera aux autorités ecclésiastiques que l’on devra
s’adresser pour tout ce qui tient à la religion, sauf à recourir dans
les affaires mixtes au conseil d’état.

3º Le conseil d’état ne sera composé _que de catholiques_ et il sera
extrêmement important, pour ne pas dire nécessaire, qu’il s’y trouve au
moins deux évêques.

4º La nonciature sera rétablie à Bruxelles. Le _conseil d’état traitera
seul avec le nonce_, au nom du souverain, des affaires ecclésiastiques
dont ce prélat devra connaître, la nomination des évêques, etc.

5º Il y aura un nouveau concordat avec le St. Siége.

6º Il est absolument nécessaire que la dotation du clergé soit
irrévocablement fixée, et qu’elle soit indépendante de l’autorité
civile. “_Pour cet effet il suffirait de rétablir la dîme._”--En
revanche la contribution foncière pourrait être diminuée d’un
cinquième, et la dîme imposée d’un cinquième.

7º L’université de Louvian sera rétablie....

8º L’entier rétablissement de la religion catholique avec tous les
droits et prérogatives y attachés, suppose la liberté donnée aux
corporations religieuses de se réunir et de vivre suivant leur
vocation. Un des plus excellents moyens, et peut-être le seul qui
existe aujourd’hui, d’assurer aux jeunes gens une éducation qui
réunit tout à la fois l’esprit de la religion et les talents les plus
éminents, serait de _rétablir les jésuites dans la Belgique_.”


                                No. V.

                     EXTRAIT DU JUGEMENT DOCTRINAL
                                  DES
    ÉVEQUES DU ROYAUME DES PAYS-BAS, SUR LE SERMENT PRESCRIT PAR LA
                        NOUVELLE CONSTITUTION.

“C’est pour remplir un des devoirs les plus essentiels de l’épiscopat,
pour nous acquitter envers les peuples sur lesquels le St.-Esprit nous
a établis évêques pour gouverner l’Eglise de Dieu (Act. 20, v. 28),
de l’obligation qui nous a été strictement imposée par l’Eglise, que
nous avons jugé nécessaire de déclarer qu’_aucun de nos diocésains
respectifs ne peut, sans trahir les plus chers intérêts de la religion,
sans se rendre coupable d’un grand crime, prêter les différents
serments prescrits par la constitution_.”

Les signataires du jugement doctrinal indiquent ensuite les principes
qui, selon eux, “sont contraires à l’esprit et aux maximes de la
religion.” Ce sont les art. 190-196, 226, 143, et le 2e article
additionnel. Ils observent à légard de ces dispositions:

“(ART. 190 et 191) 1º Jurer de maintenir la liberté des opinions
religieuses et la protection égale à tous les cultes, qu’est-ce autre
chose que de maintenir, de protéger l’erreur comme la vérité?

(ART. 192) 2º Jurer de maintenir l’observation d’une loi _qui rend
tous les sujets du roi, de quelque croyance religieuse qu’ils soient,
habiles à posséder toutes les dignités et emplois quelconques, ce
serait justifier d’avance et sanctionner les mesures qui pourront être
prises pour confier les intérêts de notre sainte religion dans ces
provinces, si éminemment catholiques, à des fonctionnaires protestants_.

(ART. 193) 3º Jurer d’observer et de maintenir une loi _qui met dans
les mains du gouvernement le pouvoir de faire cesser l’exercice de la
religion catholique, lorsqu’il a été l’occasion_ d’un trouble, n’est-ce
pas faire dépendre à l’avenir, autant qu’il est _en soi, l’exercice de
notre sainte religion de la volonté de ses ennemis et de la malice des
méchants_?

(ART. 196) 4º Jurer d’observer et de maintenir une loi qui _suppose_
(!) _que l’église catholique est soumise aux lois de l’état, c’est
manifestement s’exposer à coopérer à l’asservissement de l’église_.
C’est au fond soumettre, suivant l’expression de notre saint-père le
pape, la puissance spirituelle aux caprices de la puissance séculière.
(Bulle du 10 Juin, 1809.)

(ART. 226) 5º Jurer d’observer et de maintenir une loi qui attribue
au souverain, _et à un souverain qui ne professe pas notre sainte
religion, le droit de régler l’instruction publique, les écoles
supérieures, moyennes et inférieures_, c’est lui livrer à discrétion
l’enseignement public, _c’est trahir honteusement les plus chers
intérêts de l’église catholique_.

(ART. 143) 6º Jurer d’observer et de maintenir une loi qui autorise les
états provinciaux à exécuter les lois relatives à la protection des
différents cultes, à leur exercice extérieur, à l’instruction publique,
n’est-ce pas confier les plus grands intérêts de la religion à des
laïques? ... _à dieu ne plaise qu’aucun enfant de l’église concoure par
un serment solennel à maintenir un tel ordre de choses!_

(ART. 2 addit.) 7º Jurer de regarder comme obligatoires, jusqu’à ce
qu’il y soit autrement pourvu, et de maintenir toutes les lois qui sont
maintenant en vigueur, ce serait coopérer évidemment à l’exécution
éventuelle de plusieurs lois anti-catholiques et manifestement injustes
que renferment les codes civil et penal de l’ancien gouvernement
français, et notamment de celles qui permettent le divorce, qui
autorisent légalement des unions incestueuses condamnées par l’Eglise,
qui décernent contre les ministres de l’Evangile, fidèles à leur
devoir, les peines les plus sévères (?) etc. Toutes lois qu’un vrai
catholique doit avoir en horreur.

Il est encore d’autres articles qu’un véritable enfant de l’Eglise ne
peut s’engager, par serment, à observer et à maintenir...; _tel est en
particulier le 227me qui autorise la liberté de la presse_.

Nous avons dû considérer ces articles, en eux-mêmes, et sous le
rapport des funestes effets qui _doivent_, tôt ou tard, résulter de
leur exécution. Le caractère connu de notre auguste monarque nous
donne sans doute un juste motif d’espérer qu’il daignera, par sa
royale sollicitude, en preserver autant que possible ses provinces
catholiques, qui forment la majeure partie du nouveau royaume; _mais
des qu’une loi humaine est intrinséquement mauvaise et opposée à la
loi divine et aux lois de l’église, on ne peut, sous aucun prétexte,
s’engager d’y obéir_.”

_Signé_, “LE PRINCE MAURICE DE BROGLIE, évêque de Gand.

CHARLES FRANÇOIS JOSEPH PISANI DE LA GAUDE, évêque de Namur.

FRANÇOIS JOSEPH, évêque de Tournai.

J’adhère au _jugement doctrinal_ ci-dessus porté par messeigneurs les
évêques du royaume des Pays-Bas:

J. FORGEUR, vicaire-général de l’archevêché de Malines.

J’y adhère également:

J.-A. BARRETT, vicaire-général, cap. de Liège.”


                                LONDON.
             PRINTED BY SCHULZE & CO., 13, POLAND STREET.


FOOTNOTES

[1] White’s Belgic Revolution, vol. ii. p. 10.

[2] The price of their heavy metal castings, is fifteen francs
per cwt.; and lighter ones, twenty francs; millwork twenty-two to
twenty-five francs. The workmen are all Belgians and receive on an
average two francs to three and a half per day. All the tools in use
are English. Their power is one of Wolfs engines of twenty-five horse
power, consuming eight lbs. of coal, per horse power. Coals from
Charleroi cost twenty-seven francs per ton for large pieces.

[3] Briavionne, v. 2, p. 474.

[4] White’s Belgic Revolution, vol. i. p. 94.

[5] L’Industrie en Belgique, v. 2, p. 378.

[6] A copy of the original paper will be found in the appendix to this
volume.

[7] The cottons of all other countries were excluded from Java and the
other Dutch colonies by ad valorem duty of twenty-five per cent.

[8] “Travaux publics en Belgique,” a comprehensive document just
published in Brussels, by M. Nothomb, minister of public works, with
copious details upon the railroads. A very able paper, by Mr. Rawson,
in the proceedings of the Statistical Society of London, contains also
ample information regarding them.

[9] M. Briavionne, v. ii. p. 445.

[10] Vol. 2, p. 262.

[11] About 53lbs. less than an English ton.

[12] A memorandum given me by Count d’Hane, shows the cost of a cargo
of coals for the university of Ghent, in the present year (1840) as
follows:--

                                                   f.   c.

  2734 hectolitres of gaillettes and small coal   3898  70
  Charges at the pit                               109  36
  Freight to Ghent                                 683  50
                                                  --------
                                                  4691  56

  Charges at Ghent         f.  c.
  City dues               131  55
  Labourers                16  24
  Cost of unloading       368  33
  Superintendant           14                      529  12
                          -------                 --------
  Cost of the 2734 hectolitres in store           5220  68

1000 livres of Ghent thus cost 10f. 95c.; and as there are 2300
livres in a ton of 1000 kilogrammes, the price, as compared with M.
Briavionne’s statement, would be 25f. 18c. per ton. I have, however,
mentioned that the price has fallen considerably since the panic of
1837 and 1838, which accounts for the difference.

[13] This estimate, given to me on the spot, I have reason to think
must be incorrect, as in 1838 it was valued at but half this sum; and
even its subsequent enlargement and addition can scarcely have doubled
its value within so short a time.

[14] Vol. ii., p. 332.

[15] De L’Industrie en Belgique, vol. ii. p. 396.

[16] Pavia scarcely less renowned for the prowess of Charlemagne, than
the graceful gallantry of Francis I.

[17] Le transport entre pour 2½ à 3 p. c. dans ce prix de 8½ moyennant
lequel les fraudeurs s’engagent à rendre en dix jours la marchandise de
France à Bruxelles.



Corrections

The first line indicates the original, the second the correction.

p. vi

  The vilage
  The village

p. xi

  The Hotel de ville
  The Hôtel de ville

p. 16

  near the Schræbeck gate
  near the Schærbeck gate

p. 24

  as quickly possible,
  as quickly as possible,

p. 38

  pour être témoin veredique
  pour être témoin véridique

  a century latter
  a century later

p. 45

  Another most important branch of maratime trade
  Another most important branch of maritime trade

p. 51

  the Catheral of Antwerp
  the Cathedral of Antwerp

p. 54

  Ve Vos,
  de Vos

p. 65

  The congregration
  The congregation

p. 161

  Namur and and Schlayen.
  Namur and Schlayen.

p. 179

  hugh
  huge

p. 239

  We staid during our visit
  We stayed during our visit

p. 249

  Machine a
  Machine à

  Métier a
  Métier à




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 73945 ***
